_pages/dln.md, before:

---
permalink: /dln/
title: "Digital Literacy Narrative"
author_profile: false
categories:
  - DNL
tags:
  - Done
toc: true
toc_label: "Digital Litaracy Narrative"
toc_sticky: true
---
**Step 1:** focuses on personalizing a provided text to reflect my own digital literacies and the skills I aim to develop this semester. The goal is to revise the Generated Response (by GPT-4o, 30 Jan 25) to reflect my perspective while keeping it around 750 words.

**Due date:** 8 February 2025.
{: .notice}

## Prompt:

> Write a 750 word reflection on digital literacy from the perspective of a 20 year old university student at a liberal arts university. Include strategies they might already know how to employ in their daily and academic lives for content creation, social interaction, as well as any platforms or software they use for research data management as well as data manipulation and analysis. Consider the different skill sets in the room given all the interdisciplinary majors ( in different fields such as Computer Science, Interactive Media, Film and New Media, Literature or Creative Writing, Art and Art History). Reflect on how digital humanities might offer new horizons on what they are studying, how collaboration might offer new avenues for developing their “computational thinking” that is in the sense of Berry and Fagerjord (A cognitive practice involving practical wisdom and reflection on computation) and how they can learn about new ways of approaching data and the world of AI. Offer critical reflection on your current abilities, what you are what you are discovering in the course as well as what kinds of new ways of thinking you would like to explore.

### Navigating Digital Literacy as an Interactive Media Arts Student
As a 22-year-old student at NYU Shanghai, majoring in Interactive Media Arts, digital literacy has become an essential aspect of both my academic and personal development. Beyond the technical skills of using computers and social media, digital literacy involves understanding how digital tools impact our lives and learning to engage with them critically. The rapid advancements in AI and data-driven technologies have made digital literacy an ongoing journey of exploration and growth, constantly evolving as I learn new tools and concepts.

### The Role of Digital Tools in Creation, Collaboration, and Communication
Digital tools are at the heart of my creative process. As an Interactive Media Arts student, I regularly use Figma and Miro for UI/UX design, Unity, Rhino8, and Maya for 3D modeling, and Adobe Animate for 2D animation. Recently, I’ve also ventured into film production using DaVinci Resolve and am developing skills in camera work. My peers in Creative Writing and Film are similarly immersed in digital platforms, with Creative Writing students using Medium and Substack to publish essays, and Film students working with Adobe Premiere Pro and DaVinci Resolve for editing. While our tools may differ based on discipline, we all rely on digital platforms for creation, communication, and collaboration.

For academic projects, platforms like Discord, Slack, and Trello help us organize our work, while Google Workspace facilitates documentation and collaboration. Even students in Art History, who traditionally rely on physical archives, are using digital tools like Google Arts & Culture to curate virtual exhibits, demonstrating the versatility of digital tools across disciplines.

### Digital Organization and Data Analysis in Research
Effective data management and analysis have become crucial in my research process. I use Zotero to organize citations, GitHub for version control, and Unity to prototype interactive experiences. My peers in Computer Science rely on GitHub for collaborative coding projects, while Art History students use JSTOR and Artstor for research. These tools have not only helped me organize and access data but also pushed me to think critically about how digital tools can shape and enhance research.

Data analysis is another key area where digital tools are invaluable. I’ve used Voyant Tools for text analysis, and my peers in Computer Science often work with Python and R for data visualization. In Film and New Media, we also use tools like Google Analytics to analyze audience engagement. Additionally, experimenting with Node-RED has expanded my understanding of data integration and decision-making.

### The Intersection of Creativity and Technology in Digital Humanities
Digital humanities is a field that merges traditional humanities with computational techniques, offering new perspectives on my studies. Tools like Unity, Figma, Node-RED, and programming languages such as JavaScript and Python have shifted my approach to analysis, especially in literature and media. I’ve worked with machine learning models to analyze sentiment and topics in text, which made me realize how interconnected different fields of study can be. Digital humanities offer exciting opportunities for interactive design and network analysis, allowing me to engage with content in ways traditional research methods can’t.

A recent project exploring spatial data analysis, like creating a map of UFO sightings, revealed how data can uncover hidden patterns and connections. This use of technology to transform traditional research methods has deepened my understanding of computational thinking, as defined by Berry and Fagerjord—thinking critically about the role and impact of technology in our work.

### Building Digital Literacy and Technical Expertise
Throughout my studies, I’ve gained a solid foundation in digital tools that extend beyond content creation, fostering collaboration and communication across disciplines. Learning to use GitHub for version control has improved my understanding of collaborative workflows, while creating static websites on GitHub has deepened my grasp of web development. These experiences have helped me realize the importance of structure and presentation in online engagement.

Tools like Voyant and Posit Cloud have been instrumental in analyzing large text corpora, revealing patterns that traditional close reading might overlook. This exposure has led me to think more critically about remediation—the process of transforming content from one medium to another. In today’s digital age, remediation is key to making content more accessible and interactive, reaching a broader audience.

AI tools like GPT have also sparked my interest in the future of content creation and data analysis. However, I remain cautious about privacy and data security, particularly when handling sensitive information. The ethical considerations of AI and data use are areas I am actively exploring as part of my ongoing digital literacy journey.

### Exploring Digital Tools, Web Creation, and AI
We examined the distinctions between static, dynamic, and interactive websites, which helped me grasp how digital platforms operate depending on their design and function. This knowledge is crucial when considering the right platform for different projects. I’ve been able to engage with tools like DOT (Document Object Technology), which have helped me explore offline document analysis, while corpus tools have deepened my understanding of language processing.

AI tools, such as GPT, bring a range of challenges, especially regarding privacy. In our discussions, we’ve talked about how AI tools might not be suitable for handling sensitive or confidential data, considering how these systems store and process information. This reinforces the need for careful ethical consideration when using AI technologies. As I continue to work with AI and other digital tools, I find myself reflecting more on their societal impact and the responsibility we have in using these technologies responsibly and ethically. Understanding the privacy implications and potential biases of AI systems is something I’m keen to explore further as I progress in my studies and digital literacy journey.

### Reflecting on My Digital Journey and Future Directions
While I’ve gained proficiency in tools like Unity, Figma, Node-RED, and JavaScript, I’m excited to further explore natural language processing and data storytelling. AI’s potential in interactive media, particularly in generative text models and immersive storytelling, is something I find fascinating. I look forward to exploring how these tools can be applied both creatively and critically.

At the same time, I am keen to examine the ethical implications of digital work, especially how biases in AI might influence the information we access. Understanding these challenges will be key as I continue developing my digital literacy. Digital literacy isn’t just about mastering technical skills; it’s about critically engaging with technology and understanding its societal impact.

### Growing as a Digital Thinker
Looking ahead, I’m excited to dive deeper into digital humanities and computational thinking. For me, digital literacy means not only mastering tools but also understanding how they work and how they can be applied meaningfully. I aim to bridge the gap between the tools I use and the critical thinking required to apply them effectively. The interdisciplinary environment at NYU Shanghai offers the perfect opportunity to explore how technology and the humanities intersect, allowing me to make sense of the world in new and exciting ways.

Used GPT to refine my text
{: .notice}

Commit message:

adding about the NYUAD archive

_pages/dln.md, after:

---
permalink: /dln/
title: "Digital Literacy Narrative"
author_profile: false
categories:
  - DNL
tags:
  - Done
toc: true
toc_label: "Digital Litaracy Narrative"
toc_sticky: true
---
**Step 1:** focuses on personalizing a provided text to reflect my own digital literacies and the skills I aim to develop this semester. The goal is to revise the Generated Response (by GPT-4o, 30 Jan 25) to reflect my perspective while keeping it around 750 words.

**Due date:** 8 February 2025.
{: .notice}

## Prompt:

> Write a 750 word reflection on digital literacy from the perspective of a 20 year old university student at a liberal arts university. Include strategies they might already know how to employ in their daily and academic lives for content creation, social interaction, as well as any platforms or software they use for research data management as well as data manipulation and analysis. Consider the different skill sets in the room given all the interdisciplinary majors ( in different fields such as Computer Science, Interactive Media, Film and New Media, Literature or Creative Writing, Art and Art History). Reflect on how digital humanities might offer new horizons on what they are studying, how collaboration might offer new avenues for developing their “computational thinking” that is in the sense of Berry and Fagerjord (A cognitive practice involving practical wisdom and reflection on computation) and how they can learn about new ways of approaching data and the world of AI. Offer critical reflection on your current abilities, what you are what you are discovering in the course as well as what kinds of new ways of thinking you would like to explore.

### Navigating Digital Literacy as an Interactive Media Arts Student
As a 22-year-old student at NYU Shanghai, majoring in Interactive Media Arts, digital literacy has become an essential aspect of both my academic and personal development. Beyond the technical skills of using computers and social media, digital literacy involves understanding how digital tools impact our lives and learning to engage with them critically. The rapid advancements in AI and data-driven technologies have made digital literacy an ongoing journey of exploration and growth, constantly evolving as I learn new tools and concepts.

### The Role of Digital Tools in Creation, Collaboration, and Communication
Digital tools are at the heart of my creative process. As an Interactive Media Arts student, I regularly use Figma and Miro for UI/UX design, Unity, Rhino8, and Maya for 3D modeling, and Adobe Animate for 2D animation. Recently, I’ve also ventured into film production using DaVinci Resolve and am developing skills in camera work. My peers in Creative Writing and Film are similarly immersed in digital platforms, with Creative Writing students using Medium and Substack to publish essays, and Film students working with Adobe Premiere Pro and DaVinci Resolve for editing. While our tools may differ based on discipline, we all rely on digital platforms for creation, communication, and collaboration.

For academic projects, platforms like Discord, Slack, and Trello help us organize our work, while Google Workspace facilitates documentation and collaboration. Even students in Art History, who traditionally rely on physical archives, are using digital tools like Google Arts & Culture to curate virtual exhibits, demonstrating the versatility of digital tools across disciplines.

### Digital Organization and Data Analysis in Research
Effective data management and analysis have become crucial in my research process. I use Zotero to organize citations, GitHub for version control, and Unity to prototype interactive experiences. My peers in Computer Science rely on GitHub for collaborative coding projects, while Art History students use JSTOR and Artstor for research. These tools have not only helped me organize and access data but also pushed me to think critically about how digital tools can shape and enhance research.

Data analysis is another key area where digital tools are invaluable. I’ve used Voyant Tools for text analysis, and my peers in Computer Science often work with Python and R for data visualization. In Film and New Media, we also use tools like Google Analytics to analyze audience engagement. Additionally, experimenting with Node-RED has expanded my understanding of data integration and decision-making.

### The Intersection of Creativity and Technology in Digital Humanities
Exploring digital humanities has highlighted the immense potential of historical newspapers as resources for analysis. These documents contain valuable data revealing cultural trends, political movements, and everyday life. They extend beyond mere records of events, offering a rich landscape for digital analysis that uncovers patterns, linguistic shifts, and sentiments over time.

However, working with historical newspapers in class posed challenges. Unlike modern digital content, older newspapers have complex layouts, varied fonts, images, and structural inconsistencies. Addressing these challenges required careful data organization and cleaning. Historical newspapers, often degraded and inconsistently formatted, necessitate meticulous management to ensure accurate analysis. Successful digital humanities projects rely not only on appropriate tools but also on the structure and preparation of data.

My exploration of the NYUAD Library's Special Collections deepened my understanding of digital humanities. Examining physical copies of newspapers, images, paintings, journals, letters, and maps related to Zanzibar provided firsthand insight into the diverse materials available for digital analysis. For instance, a colonial-era map depicting territorial divisions and railroad construction revealed historical narratives embedded in visual artifacts. The challenge lies in digitizing these varied forms and making them accessible for analysis. For class, we will focus on exploring newspapers, but this experience has reinforced how digital tools transform our engagement with historical materials.

### Building Digital Literacy and Technical Expertise
Throughout my studies, I’ve gained a solid foundation in digital tools that extend beyond content creation, fostering collaboration and communication across disciplines. Learning to use GitHub for version control has improved my understanding of collaborative workflows, while creating static websites on GitHub has deepened my grasp of web development. These experiences have helped me realize the importance of structure and presentation in online engagement.

Tools like Voyant and Posit Cloud have been instrumental in analyzing large text corpora, revealing patterns that traditional close reading might overlook. This exposure has led me to think more critically about remediation—the process of transforming content from one medium to another. In today’s digital age, remediation is key to making content more accessible and interactive, reaching a broader audience.

AI tools like GPT have also sparked my interest in the future of content creation and data analysis. However, I remain cautious about privacy and data security, particularly when handling sensitive information. The ethical considerations of AI and data use are areas I am actively exploring as part of my ongoing digital literacy journey.

### Exploring Digital Tools, Web Creation, and AI
We examined the distinctions between static, dynamic, and interactive websites, which helped me grasp how digital platforms operate depending on their design and function. This knowledge is crucial when considering the right platform for different projects. I’ve been able to engage with tools like DOT (Document Object Technology), which have helped me explore offline document analysis, while corpus tools have deepened my understanding of language processing.

AI tools, such as GPT, bring a range of challenges, especially regarding privacy. In our discussions, we’ve talked about how AI tools might not be suitable for handling sensitive or confidential data, considering how these systems store and process information. This reinforces the need for careful ethical consideration when using AI technologies. As I continue to work with AI and other digital tools, I find myself reflecting more on their societal impact and the responsibility we have in using these technologies responsibly and ethically. Understanding the privacy implications and potential biases of AI systems is something I’m keen to explore further as I progress in my studies and digital literacy journey.

### Reflecting on My Digital Journey and Future Directions
While I’ve gained proficiency in tools like Unity, Figma, Node-RED, and JavaScript, I’m excited to further explore natural language processing and data storytelling. AI’s potential in interactive media, particularly in generative text models and immersive storytelling, is something I find fascinating. I look forward to exploring how these tools can be applied both creatively and critically.

At the same time, I am keen to examine the ethical implications of digital work, especially how biases in AI might influence the information we access. Understanding these challenges will be key as I continue developing my digital literacy. Digital literacy isn’t just about mastering technical skills; it’s about critically engaging with technology and understanding its societal impact.

### Growing as a Digital Thinker
Looking ahead, I’m excited to dive deeper into digital humanities and computational thinking. For me, digital literacy means not only mastering tools but also understanding how they work and how they can be applied meaningfully. I aim to bridge the gap between the tools I use and the critical thinking required to apply them effectively. The interdisciplinary environment at NYU Shanghai offers the perfect opportunity to explore how technology and the humanities intersect, allowing me to make sense of the world in new and exciting ways.

Used GPT to refine my text
{: .notice}
