RODNEY STONE

CHAPTER I.
FRIAR�S OAK.

ON this, the first of January of the year 1851, the nineteenth century
has reached its midway term, and many of us who shared its youth have
already warnings which tell us that it has outworn us.  We put our
grizzled heads together, we older ones, and we talk of the great days
that we have known; but we find that when it is with our children that we
talk it is a hard matter to make them understand.  We and our fathers
before us lived much the same life, but they with their railway trains
and their steamboats belong to a different age.  It is true that we can
put history-books into their hands, and they can read from them of our
weary struggle of two and twenty years with that great and evil man.
They can learn how Freedom fled from the whole broad continent, and how
Nelson�s blood was shed, and Pitt�s noble heart was broken in striving
that she should not pass us for ever to take refuge with our brothers
across the Atlantic.  All this they can read, with the date of this
treaty or that battle, but I do not know where they are to read of
ourselves, of the folk we were, and the lives we led, and how the world
seemed to our eyes when they were young as theirs are now.

If I take up my pen to tell you about this, you must not look for any
story at my hands, for I was only in my earliest manhood when these
things befell; and although I saw something of the stories of other
lives, I could scarce claim one of my own.  It is the love of a woman
that makes the story of a man, and many a year was to pass before I first
looked into the eyes of the mother of my children.  To us it seems but an
affair of yesterday, and yet those children can now reach the plums in
the garden whilst we are seeking for a ladder, and where we once walked
with their little hands in ours, we are glad now to lean upon their arms.
But I shall speak of a time when the love of a mother was the only love I
knew, and if you seek for something more, then it is not for you that I
write.  But if you would come out with me into that forgotten world; if
you would know Boy Jim and Champion Harrison; if you would meet my
father, one of Nelson�s own men; if you would catch a glimpse of that
great seaman himself, and of George, afterwards the unworthy King of
England; if, above all, you would see my famous uncle, Sir Charles
Tregellis, the King of the Bucks, and the great fighting men whose names
are still household words amongst you, then give me your hand and let us
start.

But I must warn you also that, if you think you will find much that is of
interest in your guide, you are destined to disappointment.  When I look
over my bookshelves, I can see that it is only the wise and witty and
valiant who have ventured to write down their experiences.  For my own
part, if I were only assured that I was as clever and brave as the
average man about me, I should be well satisfied.  Men of their hands
have thought well of my brains, and men of brains of my hands, and that
is the best that I can say of myself.  Save in the one matter of having
an inborn readiness for music, so that the mastery of any instrument
comes very easily and naturally to me, I cannot recall any single
advantage which I can boast over my fellows.  In all things I have been a
half-way man, for I am of middle height, my eyes are neither blue nor
grey, and my hair, before Nature dusted it with her powder, was betwixt
flaxen and brown.  I may, perhaps, claim this: that through life I have
never felt a touch of jealousy as I have admired a better man than
myself, and that I have always seen all things as they are, myself
included, which should count in my favour now that I sit down in my
mature age to write my memories.  With your permission, then, we will
push my own personality as far as possible out of the picture.  If you
can conceive me as a thin and colourless cord upon which my would-be
pearls are strung, you will be accepting me upon the terms which I should
wish.

Our family, the Stones, have for many generations belonged to the navy,
and it has been a custom among us for the eldest son to take the name of
his father�s favourite commander.  Thus we can trace our lineage back to
old Vernon Stone, who commanded a high-sterned, peak-nosed, fifty-gun
ship against the Dutch.  Through Hawke Stone and Benbow Stone we came
down to my father, Anson Stone, who in his turn christened me Rodney, at
the parish church of St. Thomas at Portsmouth in the year of grace 1786.

Out of my window as I write I can see my own great lad in the garden, and
if I were to call out �Nelson!� you would see that I have been true to
the traditions of our family.

My dear mother, the best that ever a man had, was the second daughter of
the Reverend John Tregellis, Vicar of Milton, which is a small parish
upon the borders of the marshes of Langstone.  She came of a poor family,
but one of some position, for her elder brother was the famous Sir
Charles Tregellis, who, having inherited the money of a wealthy East
Indian merchant, became in time the talk of the town and the very
particular friend of the Prince of Wales.  Of him I shall have more to
say hereafter; but you will note now that he was my own uncle, and
brother to my mother.

I can remember her all through her beautiful life for she was but a girl
when she married, and little more when I can first recall her busy
fingers and her gentle voice.  I see her as a lovely woman with kind,
dove�s eyes, somewhat short of stature it is true, but carrying herself
very bravely.  In my memories of those days she is clad always in some
purple shimmering stuff, with a white kerchief round her long white neck,
and I see her fingers turning and darting as she works at her knitting.
I see her again in her middle years, sweet and loving, planning,
contriving, achieving, with the few shillings a day of a lieutenant�s pay
on which to support the cottage at Friar�s Oak, and to keep a fair face
to the world.  And now, if I do but step into the parlour, I can see her
once more, with over eighty years of saintly life behind her,
silver-haired, placid-faced, with her dainty ribboned cap, her
gold-rimmed glasses, and her woolly shawl with the blue border.  I loved
her young and I love her old, and when she goes she will take something
with her which nothing in the world can ever make good to me again.  You
may have many friends, you who read this, and you may chance to marry
more than once, but your mother is your first and your last.  Cherish
her, then, whilst you may, for the day will come when every hasty deed or
heedless word will come back with its sting to hive in your own heart.

Such, then, was my mother; and as to my father, I can describe him best
when I come to the time when he returned to us from the Mediterranean.
During all my childhood he was only a name to me, and a face in a
miniature hung round my mother�s neck.  At first they told me he was
fighting the French, and then after some years one heard less about the
French and more about General Buonaparte.  I remember the awe with which
one day in Thomas Street, Portsmouth, I saw a print of the great Corsican
in a bookseller�s window.  This, then, was the arch enemy with whom my
father spent his life in terrible and ceaseless contest.  To my childish
imagination it was a personal affair, and I for ever saw my father and
this clean-shaven, thin-lipped man swaying and reeling in a deadly,
year-long grapple.  It was not until I went to the Grammar School that I
understood how many other little boys there were whose fathers were in
the same case.

Only once in those long years did my father return home, which will show
you what it meant to be the wife of a sailor in those days.  It was just
after we had moved from Portsmouth to Friar�s Oak, whither he came for a
week before he set sail with Admiral Jervis to help him to turn his name
into Lord St. Vincent.  I remember that he frightened as well as
fascinated me with his talk of battles, and I can recall as if it were
yesterday the horror with which I gazed upon a spot of blood upon his
shirt ruffle, which had come, as I have no doubt, from a mischance in
shaving.  At the time I never questioned that it had spurted from some
stricken Frenchman or Spaniard, and I shrank from him in terror when he
laid his horny hand upon my head.  My mother wept bitterly when he was
gone, but for my own part I was not sorry to see his blue back and white
shorts going down the garden walk, for I felt, with the heedless
selfishness of a child, that we were closer together, she and I, when we
were alone.

I was in my eleventh year when we moved from Portsmouth to Friar�s Oak, a
little Sussex village to the north of Brighton, which was recommended to
us by my uncle, Sir Charles Tregellis, one of whose grand friends, Lord
Avon, had had his seat near there.  The reason of our moving was that
living was cheaper in the country, and that it was easier for my mother
to keep up the appearance of a gentlewoman when away from the circle of
those to whom she could not refuse hospitality.  They were trying times
those to all save the farmers, who made such profits that they could, as
I have heard, afford to let half their land lie fallow, while living like
gentlemen upon the rest.  Wheat was at a hundred and ten shillings a
quarter, and the quartern loaf at one and ninepence.  Even in the quiet
of the cottage of Friar�s Oak we could scarce have lived, were it not
that in the blockading squadron in which my father was stationed there
was the occasional chance of a little prize-money.  The line-of-battle
ships themselves, tacking on and off outside Brest, could earn nothing
save honour; but the frigates in attendance made prizes of many coasters,
and these, as is the rule of the service, were counted as belonging to
the fleet, and their produce divided into head-money.  In this manner my
father was able to send home enough to keep the cottage and to pay for me
at the day school of Mr. Joshua Allen, where for four years I learned all
that he had to teach.  It was at Allen�s school that I first knew Jim
Harrison, Boy Jim as he has always been called, the nephew of Champion
Harrison of the village smithy.  I can see him as he was in those days
with great, floundering, half-formed limbs like a Newfoundland puppy, and
a face that set every woman�s head round as he passed her.  It was in
those days that we began our lifelong friendship, a friendship which
still in our waning years binds us closely as two brothers.  I taught him
his exercises, for he never loved the sight of a book, and he in turn
made me box and wrestle, tickle trout on the Adur, and snare rabbits on
Ditching Down, for his hands were as active as his brain was slow.  He
was two years my elder, however, so that, long before I had finished my
schooling, he had gone to help his uncle at the smithy.

Friar�s Oak is in a dip of the Downs, and the forty-third milestone
between London and Brighton lies on the skirt of the village.  It is but
a small place, with an ivied church, a fine vicarage, and a row of
red-brick cottages each in its own little garden.  At one end was the
forge of Champion Harrison, with his house behind it, and at the other
was Mr. Allen�s school.  The yellow cottage, standing back a little from
the road, with its upper story bulging forward and a crisscross of black
woodwork let into the plaster, is the one in which we lived.  I do not
know if it is still standing, but I should think it likely, for it was
not a place much given to change.

Just opposite to us, at the other side of the broad, white road, was the
Friar�s Oak Inn, which was kept in my day by John Cummings, a man of
excellent repute at home, but liable to strange outbreaks when he
travelled, as will afterwards become apparent.  Though there was a stream
of traffic upon the road, the coaches from Brighton were too fresh to
stop, and those from London too eager to reach their journey�s end, so
that if it had not been for an occasional broken trace or loosened wheel,
the landlord would have had only the thirsty throats of the village to
trust to.  Those were the days when the Prince of Wales had just built
his singular palace by the sea, and so from May to September, which was
the Brighton season, there was never a day that from one to two hundred
curricles, chaises, and phaetons did not rattle past our doors.  Many a
summer evening have Boy Jim and I lain upon the grass, watching all these
grand folk, and cheering the London coaches as they came roaring through
the dust clouds, leaders and wheelers stretched to their work, the bugles
screaming and the coachmen with their low-crowned, curly-brimmed hats,
and their faces as scarlet as their coats.  The passengers used to laugh
when Boy Jim shouted at them, but if they could have read his big,
half-set limbs and his loose shoulders aright, they would have looked a
little harder at him, perhaps, and given him back his cheer.

Boy Jim had never known a father or a mother, and his whole life had been
spent with his uncle, Champion Harrison.  Harrison was the Friar�s Oak
blacksmith, and he had his nickname because he fought Tom Johnson when he
held the English belt, and would most certainly have beaten him had the
Bedfordshire magistrates not appeared to break up the fight.  For years
there was no such glutton to take punishment and no more finishing hitter
than Harrison, though he was always, as I understand, a slow one upon his
feet.  At last, in a fight with Black Baruk the Jew, he finished the
battle with such a lashing hit that he not only knocked his opponent over
the inner ropes, but he left him betwixt life and death for long three
weeks.  During all this time Harrison lived half demented, expecting
every hour to feel the hand of a Bow Street runner upon his collar, and
to be tried for his life.  This experience, with the prayers of his wife,
made him forswear the ring for ever, and carry his great muscles into the
one trade in which they seemed to give him an advantage.  There was a
good business to be done at Friar�s Oak from the passing traffic and the
Sussex farmers, so that he soon became the richest of the villagers; and
he came to church on a Sunday with his wife and his nephew, looking as
respectable a family man as one would wish to see.

He was not a tall man, not more than five feet seven inches, and it was
often said that if he had had an extra inch of reach he would have been a
match for Jackson or Belcher at their best.  His chest was like a barrel,
and his forearms were the most powerful that I have ever seen, with deep
groves between the smooth-swelling muscles like a piece of water-worn
rock.  In spite of his strength, however, he was of a slow, orderly, and
kindly disposition, so that there was no man more beloved over the whole
country side.  His heavy, placid, clean-shaven face could set very
sternly, as I have seen upon occasion; but for me and every child in the
village there was ever a smile upon his lips and a greeting in his eyes.
There was not a beggar upon the country side who did not know that his
heart was as soft as his muscles were hard.

There was nothing that he liked to talk of more than his old battles, but
he would stop if he saw his little wife coming, for the one great shadow
in her life was the ever-present fear that some day he would throw down
sledge and rasp and be off to the ring once more.  And you must be
reminded here once for all that that former calling of his was by no
means at that time in the debased condition to which it afterwards fell.
Public opinion has gradually become opposed to it, for the reason that it
came largely into the hands of rogues, and because it fostered ringside
ruffianism.  Even the honest and brave pugilist was found to draw
villainy round him, just as the pure and noble racehorse does.  For this
reason the Ring is dying in England, and we may hope that when Caunt and
Bendigo have passed away, they may have none to succeed them.  But it was
different in the days of which I speak.  Public opinion was then largely
in its favour, and there were good reasons why it should be so.  It was a
time of war, when England with an army and navy composed only of those
who volunteered to fight because they had fighting blood in them, had to
encounter, as they would now have to encounter, a power which could by
despotic law turn every citizen into a soldier.  If the people had not
been full of this lust for combat, it is certain that England must have
been overborne.  And it was thought, and is, on the face of it,
reasonable, that a struggle between two indomitable men, with thirty
thousand to view it and three million to discuss it, did help to set a
standard of hardihood and endurance.  Brutal it was, no doubt, and its
brutality is the end of it; but it is not so brutal as war, which will
survive it.  Whether it is logical now to teach the people to be peaceful
in an age when their very existence may come to depend upon their being
warlike, is a question for wiser heads than mine.  But that was what we
thought of it in the days of your grandfathers, and that is why you might
find statesmen and philanthropists like Windham, Fox, and Althorp at the
side of the Ring.

The mere fact that solid men should patronize it was enough in itself to
prevent the villainy which afterwards crept in.  For over twenty years,
in the days of Jackson, Brain, Cribb, the Belchers, Pearce, Gully, and
the rest, the leaders of the Ring were men whose honesty was above
suspicion; and those were just the twenty years when the Ring may, as I
have said, have served a national purpose.  You have heard how Pearce
saved the Bristol girl from the burning house, how Jackson won the
respect and friendship of the best men of his age, and how Gully rose to
a seat in the first Reformed Parliament.  These were the men who set the
standard, and their trade carried with it this obvious recommendation,
that it is one in which no drunken or foul-living man could long succeed.
There were exceptions among them, no doubt�bullies like Hickman and
brutes like Berks; in the main, I say again that they were honest men,
brave and enduring to an incredible degree, and a credit to the country
which produced them.  It was, as you will see, my fate to see something
of them, and I speak of what I know.

In our own village, I can assure you that we were very proud of the
presence of such a man as Champion Harrison, and if folks stayed at the
inn, they would walk down as far as the smithy just to have the sight of
him.  And he was worth seeing, too, especially on a winter�s night when
the red glare of the forge would beat upon his great muscles and upon the
proud, hawk-face of Boy Jim as they heaved and swayed over some glowing
plough coulter, framing themselves in sparks with every blow.  He would
strike once with his thirty-pound swing sledge, and Jim twice with his
hand hammer; and the �Clunk�clink, clink! clunk�clink, clink!� would
bring me flying down the village street, on the chance that, since they
were both at the anvil, there might be a place for me at the bellows.

Only once during those village years can I remember Champion Harrison
showing me for an instant the sort of man that he had been.  It chanced
one summer morning, when Boy Jim and I were standing by the smithy door,
that there came a private coach from Brighton, with its four fresh
horses, and its brass-work shining, flying along with such a merry rattle
and jingling, that the Champion came running out with a hall-fullered
shoe in his tongs to have a look at it.  A gentleman in a white
coachman�s cape�a Corinthian, as we would call him in those days�was
driving, and half a dozen of his fellows, laughing and shouting, were on
the top behind him.  It may have been that the bulk of the smith caught
his eye, and that he acted in pure wantonness, or it may possibly have
been an accident, but, as he swung past, the twenty-foot thong of the
driver�s whip hissed round, and we heard the sharp snap of it across
Harrison�s leather apron.

�Halloa, master!� shouted the smith, looking after him.  �You�re not to
be trusted on the box until you can handle your whip better�n that.�

�What�s that?� cried the driver, pulling up his team.

�I bid you have a care, master, or there will be some one-eyed folk along
the road you drive.�

�Oh, you say that, do you?� said the driver, putting his whip into its
socket and pulling off his driving-gloves.  �I�ll have a little talk with
you, my fine fellow.�

The sporting gentlemen of those days were very fine boxers for the most
part, for it was the mode to take a course of Mendoza, just as a few
years afterwards there was no man about town who had not had the mufflers
on with Jackson.  Knowing their own prowess, they never refused the
chance of a wayside adventure, and it was seldom indeed that the bargee
or the navigator had much to boast of after a young blood had taken off
his coat to him.

This one swung himself off the box-seat with the alacrity of a man who
has no doubts about the upshot of the quarrel, and after hanging his
caped coat upon the swingle-bar, he daintily turned up the ruffled cuffs
of his white cambric shirt.

�I�ll pay you for your advice, my man,� said he.

I am sure that the men upon the coach knew who the burly smith was, and
looked upon it as a prime joke to see their companion walk into such a
trap.  They roared with delight, and bellowed out scraps of advice to
him.

�Knock some of the soot off him, Lord Frederick!� they shouted.  �Give
the Johnny Raw his breakfast.  Chuck him in among his own cinders!
Sharp�s the word, or you�ll see the back of him.�

Encouraged by these cries, the young aristocrat advanced upon his man.
The smith never moved, but his mouth set grim and hard, while his tufted
brows came down over his keen, grey eyes.  The tongs had fallen, and his
hands were hanging free.

�Have a care, master,� said he.  �You�ll get pepper if you don�t.�

Something in the assured voice, and something also in the quiet pose,
warned the young lord of his danger.  I saw him look hard at his
antagonist, and as he did so, his hands and his jaw dropped together.

�By Gad!� he cried, �it�s Jack Harrison!�

�My name, master!�

�And I thought you were some Essex chaw-bacon!  Why, man, I haven�t seen
you since the day you nearly killed Black Baruk, and cost me a cool
hundred by doing it.�

How they roared on the coach.

�Smoked!  Smoked, by Gad!� they yelled.  �It�s Jack Harrison the bruiser!
Lord Frederick was going to take on the ex-champion.  Give him one on the
apron, Fred, and see what happens.�

But the driver had already climbed back into his perch, laughing as
loudly as any of his companions.

�We�ll let you off this time, Harrison,� said he.  �Are those your sons
down there?�

�This is my nephew, master.�

�Here�s a guinea for him!  He shall never say I robbed him of his uncle.�
And so, having turned the laugh in his favour by his merry way of taking
it, he cracked his whip, and away they flew to make London under the five
hours; while Jack Harrison, with his half-fullered shoe in his hand, went
whistling back to the forge.




CHAPTER II.
THE WALKER OF CLIFFE ROYAL.


SO much for Champion Harrison!  Now, I wish to say something more about
Boy Jim, not only because he was the comrade of my youth, but because you
will find as you go on that this book is his story rather than mine, and
that there came a time when his name and his fame were in the mouths of
all England.  You will bear with me, therefore, while I tell you of his
character as it was in those days, and especially of one very singular
adventure which neither of us are likely to forget.

It was strange to see Jim with his uncle and his aunt, for he seemed to
be of another race and breed to them.  Often I have watched them come up
the aisle upon a Sunday, first the square, thick-set man, and then the
little, worn, anxious-eyed woman, and last this glorious lad with his
clear-cut face, his black curls, and his step so springy and light that
it seemed as if he were bound to earth by some lesser tie than the
heavy-footed villagers round him.  He had not yet attained his full six
foot of stature, but no judge of a man (and every woman, at least, is
one) could look at his perfect shoulders, his narrow loins, and his proud
head that sat upon his neck like an eagle upon its perch, without feeling
that sober joy which all that is beautiful in Nature gives to us�a vague
self-content, as though in some way we also had a hand in the making of
it.

But we are used to associate beauty with softness in a man.  I do not
know why they should be so coupled, and they never were with Jim.  Of all
men that I have known, he was the most iron-hard in body and in mind.
Who was there among us who could walk with him, or run with him, or swim
with him?  Who on all the country side, save only Boy Jim, would have
swung himself over Wolstonbury Cliff, and clambered down a hundred feet
with the mother hawk flapping at his ears in the vain struggle to hold
him from her nest?  He was but sixteen, with his gristle not yet all set
into bone, when he fought and beat Gipsy Lee, of Burgess Hill, who called
himself the �Cock of the South Downs.�  It was after this that Champion
Harrison took his training as a boxer in hand.

�I�d rather you left millin� alone, Boy Jim,� said he, �and so had the
missus; but if mill you must, it will not be my fault if you cannot hold
up your hands to anything in the south country.�

And it was not long before he made good his promise.

I have said already that Boy Jim had no love for his books, but by that I
meant school-books, for when it came to the reading of romances or of
anything which had a touch of gallantry or adventure, there was no
tearing him away from it until it was finished.  When such a book came
into his hands, Friar�s Oak and the smithy became a dream to him, and his
life was spent out upon the ocean or wandering over the broad continents
with his heroes.  And he would draw me into his enthusiasms also, so that
I was glad to play Friday to his Crusoe when he proclaimed that the Clump
at Clayton was a desert island, and that we were cast upon it for a week.
But when I found that we were actually to sleep out there without
covering every night, and that he proposed that our food should be the
sheep of the Downs (wild goats he called them) cooked upon a fire, which
was to be made by the rubbing together of two sticks, my heart failed me,
and on the very first night I crept away to my mother.  But Jim stayed
out there for the whole weary week�a wet week it was, too!�and came back
at the end of it looking a deal wilder and dirtier than his hero does in
the picture-books.  It is well that he had only promised to stay a week,
for, if it had been a month, he would have died of cold and hunger before
his pride would have let him come home.

His pride!�that was the deepest thing in all Jim�s nature.  It is a mixed
quality to my mind, half a virtue and half a vice: a virtue in holding a
man out of the dirt; a vice in making it hard for him to rise when once
he has fallen.  Jim was proud down to the very marrow of his bones.  You
remember the guinea that the young lord had thrown him from the box of
the coach?  Two days later somebody picked it from the roadside mud.  Jim
only had seen where it had fallen, and he would not deign even to point
it out to a beggar.  Nor would he stoop to give a reason in such a case,
but would answer all remonstrances with a curl of his lip and a flash of
his dark eyes.  Even at school he was the same, with such a sense of his
own dignity, that other folk had to think of it too.  He might say, as he
did say, that a right angle was a proper sort of angle, or put Panama in
Sicily, but old Joshua Allen would as soon have thought of raising his
cane against him as he would of letting me off if I had said as much.
And so it was that, although Jim was the son of nobody, and I of a King�s
officer, it always seemed to me to have been a condescension on his part
that he should have chosen me as his friend.

It was this pride of Boy Jim�s which led to an adventure which makes me
shiver now when I think of it.

It happened in the August of �99, or it may have been in the early days
of September; but I remember that we heard the cuckoo in Patcham Wood,
and that Jim said that perhaps it was the last of him.  I was still at
school, but Jim had left, he being nigh sixteen and I thirteen.  It was
my Saturday half-holiday, and we spent it, as we often did, out upon the
Downs.  Our favourite place was beyond Wolstonbury, where we could
stretch ourselves upon the soft, springy, chalk grass among the plump
little Southdown sheep, chatting with the shepherds, as they leaned upon
their queer old Pyecombe crooks, made in the days when Sussex turned out
more iron than all the counties of England.

It was there that we lay upon that glorious afternoon.  If we chose to
roll upon our right sides, the whole weald lay in front of us, with the
North Downs curving away in olive-green folds, with here and there the
snow-white rift of a chalk-pit; if we turned upon our left, we overlooked
the huge blue stretch of the Channel.  A convoy, as I can well remember,
was coming up it that day, the timid flock of merchantmen in front; the
frigates, like well-trained dogs, upon the skirts; and two burly drover
line-of-battle ships rolling along behind them.  My fancy was soaring out
to my father upon the waters, when a word from Jim brought it back on to
the grass like a broken-winged gull.

�Roddy,� said he, �have you heard that Cliffe Royal is haunted?�

Had I heard it?  Of course I had heard it.  Who was there in all the Down
country who had not heard of the Walker of Cliffe Royal?

�Do you know the story of it, Roddy?�

�Why,� said I, with some pride, �I ought to know it, seeing that my
mother�s brother, Sir Charles Tregellis, was the nearest friend of Lord
Avon, and was at this card-party when the thing happened.  I heard the
vicar and my mother talking about it last week, and it was all so clear
to me that I might have been there when the murder was done.�

�It is a strange story,� said Jim, thoughtfully; �but when I asked my
aunt about it, she would give me no answer; and as to my uncle, he cut me
short at the very mention of it.�

�There is a good reason for that,� said I, �for Lord Avon was, as I have
heard, your uncle�s best friend; and it is but natural that he would not
wish to speak of his disgrace.�

�Tell me the story, Roddy.�

�It is an old one now�fourteen years old�and yet they have not got to the
end of it.  There were four of them who had come down from London to
spend a few days in Lord Avon�s old house.  One was his own young
brother, Captain Barrington; another was his cousin, Sir Lothian Hume;
Sir Charles Tregellis, my uncle, was the third; and Lord Avon the fourth.
They are fond of playing cards for money, these great people, and they
played and played for two days and a night.  Lord Avon lost, and Sir
Lothian lost, and my uncle lost, and Captain Barrington won until he
could win no more.  He won their money, but above all he won papers from
his elder brother which meant a great deal to him.  It was late on a
Monday night that they stopped playing.  On the Tuesday morning Captain
Barrington was found dead beside his bed with his throat cut.

�And Lord Avon did it?�

�His papers were found burned in the grate, his wristband was clutched in
the dead man�s hand, and his knife lay beside the body.�

�Did they hang him, then?�

�They were too slow in laying hands upon him.  He waited until he saw
that they had brought it home to him, and then he fled.  He has never
been seen since, but it is said that he reached America.�

�And the ghost walks?�

�There are many who have seen it.�

�Why is the house still empty?�

�Because it is in the keeping of the law.  Lord Avon had no children, and
Sir Lothian Hume�the same who was at the card-party�is his nephew and
heir.  But he can touch nothing until he can prove Lord Avon to be dead.�

Jim lay silent for a bit, plucking at the short grass with his fingers.

�Roddy,� said he at last, �will you come with me to-night and look for
the ghost?�

It turned me cold, the very thought of it.

�My mother would not let me.�

�Slip out when she�s abed.  I�ll wait for you at the smithy.�

�Cliffe Royal is locked.�

�I�ll open a window easy enough.�

�I�m afraid, Jim.�

�But you are not afraid if you are with me, Roddy.  I�ll promise you that
no ghost shall hurt you.�

So I gave him my word that I would come, and then all the rest of the day
I went about the most sad-faced lad in Sussex.  It was all very well for
Boy Jim!  It was that pride of his which was taking him there.  He would
go because there was no one else on the country side that would dare.
But I had no pride of that sort.  I was quite of the same way of thinking
as the others, and would as soon have thought of passing my night at
Jacob�s gibbet on Ditchling Common as in the haunted house of Cliffe
Royal.  Still, I could not bring myself to desert Jim; and so, as I say,
I slunk about the house with so pale and peaky a face that my dear mother
would have it that I had been at the green apples, and sent me to bed
early with a dish of camomile tea for my supper.

England went to rest betimes in those days, for there were few who could
afford the price of candles.  When I looked out of my window just after
the clock had gone ten, there was not a light in the village save only at
the inn.  It was but a few feet from the ground, so I slipped out, and
there was Jim waiting for me at the smithy corner.  We crossed John�s
Common together, and so past Ridden�s Farm, meeting only one or two
riding officers upon the way.  There was a brisk wind blowing, and the
moon kept peeping through the rifts of the scud, so that our road was
sometimes silver-clear, and sometimes so black that we found ourselves
among the brambles and gorse-bushes which lined it.  We came at last to
the wooden gate with the high stone pillars by the roadside, and, looking
through between the rails, we saw the long avenue of oaks, and at the end
of this ill-boding tunnel, the pale face of the house glimmered in the
moonshine.

That would have been enough for me, that one glimpse of it, and the sound
of the night wind sighing and groaning among the branches.  But Jim swung
the gate open, and up we went, the gravel squeaking beneath our tread.
It towered high, the old house, with many little windows in which the
moon glinted, and with a strip of water running round three sides of it.
The arched door stood right in the face of us, and on one side a lattice
hung open upon its hinges.

�We�re in luck, Roddy,� whispered Jim.  �Here�s one of the windows open.�

�Don�t you think we�ve gone far enough, Jim?� said I, with my teeth
chattering.

�I�ll lift you in first.�

�No, no, I�ll not go first.�

�Then I will.�  He gripped the sill, and had his knee on it in an
instant.  �Now, Roddy, give me your hands.�  With a pull he had me up
beside him, and a moment later we were both in the haunted house.

How hollow it sounded when we jumped down on to the wooden floor!  There
was such a sudden boom and reverberation that we both stood silent for a
moment.  Then Jim burst out laughing.

�What an old drum of a place it is!� he cried; �we�ll strike a light,
Roddy, and see where we are.�

He had brought a candle and a tinder-box in his pocket.  When the flame
burned up, we saw an arched stone roof above our heads, and broad deal
shelves all round us covered with dusty dishes.  It was the pantry.

�I�ll show you round,� said Jim, merrily; and, pushing the door open, he
led the way into the hall.  I remember the high, oak-panelled walls, with
the heads of deer jutting out, and a single white bust, which sent my
heart into my mouth, in the corner.  Many rooms opened out of this, and
we wandered from one to the other�the kitchens, the still-room, the
morning-room, the dining-room, all filled with the same choking smell of
dust and of mildew.

�This is where they played the cards, Jim,� said I, in a hushed voice.
�It was on that very table.�

�Why, here are the cards themselves!� cried he; and he pulled a brown
towel from something in the centre of the sideboard.  Sure enough it was
a pile of playing-cards�forty packs, I should think, at the least�which
had lain there ever since that tragic game which was played before I was
born.

�I wonder whence that stair leads?� said Jim.

�Don�t go up there, Jim!� I cried, clutching at his arm.  �That must lead
to the room of the murder.�

�How do you know that?�

�The vicar said that they saw on the ceiling�Oh, Jim, you can see it even
now!�

He held up his candle, and there was a great, dark smudge upon the white
plaster above us.

�I believe you�re right,� said he; �but anyhow I�m going to have a look
at it.�

�Don�t, Jim, don�t!� I cried.

�Tut, Roddy! you can stay here if you are afraid.  I won�t be more than a
minute.  There�s no use going on a ghost hunt unless�Great Lord, there�s
something coming down the stairs!�

I heard it too�a shuffling footstep in the room above, and then a creak
from the steps, and then another creak, and another.  I saw Jim�s face as
if it had been carved out of ivory, with his parted lips and his staring
eyes fixed upon the black square of the stair opening.  He still held the
light, but his fingers twitched, and with every twitch the shadows sprang
from the walls to the ceiling.  As to myself, my knees gave way under me,
and I found myself on the floor crouching down behind Jim, with a scream
frozen in my throat.  And still the step came slowly from stair to stair.

Then, hardly daring to look and yet unable to turn away my eyes, I saw a
figure dimly outlined in the corner upon which the stair opened.  There
was a silence in which I could hear my poor heart thumping, and then when
I looked again the figure was gone, and the low creak, creak was heard
once more upon the stairs.  Jim sprang after it, and I was left
half-fainting in the moonlight.

But it was not for long.  He was down again in a minute, and, passing his
hand under my arm, he half led and half carried me out of the house.  It
was not until we were in the fresh night air again that he opened his
mouth.

�Can you stand, Roddy?�

�Yes, but I�m shaking.�

�So am I,� said he, passing his hand over his forehead.  �I ask your
pardon, Roddy.  I was a fool to bring you on such an errand.  But I never
believed in such things.  I know better now.�

�Could it have been a man, Jim?� I asked, plucking up my courage now that
I could hear the dogs barking on the farms.

�It was a spirit, Rodney.�

�How do you know?�

�Because I followed it and saw it vanish into a wall, as easily as an eel
into sand.  Why, Roddy, what�s amiss now?�

My fears were all back upon me, and every nerve creeping with horror.

�Take me away, Jim!  Take me away!� I cried.

I was glaring down the avenue, and his eyes followed mine.  Amid the
gloom of the oak trees something was coming towards us.

�Quiet, Roddy!� whispered Jim.  �By heavens, come what may, my arms are
going round it this time.�

We crouched as motionless as the trunks behind us.  Heavy steps ploughed
their way through the soft gravel, and a broad figure loomed upon us in
the darkness.

Jim sprang upon it like a tiger.

�_You�re_ not a spirit, anyway!� he cried.

The man gave a shout of surprise, and then a growl of rage.

�What the deuce!� he roared, and then, �I�ll break your neck if you don�t
let go.�

The threat might not have loosened Jim�s grip, but the voice did.

�Why, uncle!� he cried.

�Well, I�m blessed if it isn�t Boy Jim!  And what�s this?  Why, it�s
young Master Rodney Stone, as I�m a living sinner!  What in the world are
you two doing up at Cliffe Royal at this time of night?�

We had all moved out into the moonlight, and there was Champion Harrison
with a big bundle on his arm,�and such a look of amazement upon his face
as would have brought a smile back on to mine had my heart not still been
cramped with fear.

�We�re exploring,� said Jim.

�Exploring, are you?  Well, I don�t think you were meant to be Captain
Cooks, either of you, for I never saw such a pair of peeled-turnip faces.
Why, Jim, what are you afraid of?�

�I�m not afraid, uncle.  I never was afraid; but spirits are new to me,
and��

�Spirits?�

�I�ve been in Cliffe Royal, and we�ve seen the ghost.�

The Champion gave a whistle.

�That�s the game, is it?� said he.  �Did you have speech with it?�

�It vanished first.�

The Champion whistled once more.

�I�ve heard there is something of the sort up yonder,� said he; �but it�s
not a thing as I would advise you to meddle with.  There�s enough trouble
with the folk of this world, Boy Jim, without going out of your way to
mix up with those of another.  As to young Master Rodney Stone, if his
good mother saw that white face of his, she�d never let him come to the
smithy more.  Walk slowly on, and I�ll see you back to Friar�s Oak.�

We had gone half a mile, perhaps, when the Champion overtook us, and I
could not but observe that the bundle was no longer under his arm.  We
were nearly at the smithy before Jim asked the question which was already
in my mind.

�What took _you_ up to Cliffe Royal, uncle?�

�Well, as a man gets on in years,� said the Champion, �there�s many a
duty turns up that the likes of you have no idea of.  When you�re near
forty yourself, you�ll maybe know the truth of what I say.�

So that was all we could draw from him; but, young as I was, I had heard
of coast smuggling and of packages carried to lonely places at night, so
that from that time on, if I had heard that the preventives had made a
capture, I was never easy until I saw the jolly face of Champion Harrison
looking out of his smithy door.




CHAPTER III.
THE PLAY-ACTRESS OF ANSTEY CROSS.


I HAVE told you something about Friar�s Oak, and about the life that we
led there.  Now that my memory goes back to the old place it would gladly
linger, for every thread which I draw from the skein of the past brings
out half a dozen others that were entangled with it.  I was in two minds
when I began whether I had enough in me to make a book of, and now I know
that I could write one about Friar�s Oak alone, and the folk whom I knew
in my childhood.  They were hard and uncouth, some of them, I doubt not;
and yet, seen through the golden haze of time, they all seem sweet and
lovable.  There was our good vicar, Mr. Jefferson, who loved the whole
world save only Mr. Slack, the Baptist minister of Clayton; and there was
kindly Mr. Slack, who was all men�s brother save only of Mr. Jefferson,
the vicar of Friar�s Oak.  Then there was Monsieur Rudin, the French
Royalist refugee who lived over on the Pangdean road, and who, when the
news of a victory came in, was convulsed with joy because we had beaten
Buonaparte, and shaken with rage because we had beaten the French, so
that after the Nile he wept for a whole day out of delight and then for
another one out of fury, alternately clapping his hands and stamping his
feet.  Well I remember his thin, upright figure and the way in which he
jauntily twirled his little cane; for cold and hunger could not cast him
down, though we knew that he had his share of both.  Yet he was so proud
and had such a grand manner of talking, that no one dared to offer him a
cloak or a meal.  I can see his face now, with a flush over each craggy
cheek-bone when the butcher made him the present of some ribs of beef.
He could not but take it, and yet whilst he was stalking off he threw a
proud glance over his shoulder at the butcher, and he said, �Monsieur, I
have a dog!�  Yet it was Monsieur Rudin and not his dog who looked
plumper for a week to come.

Then I remember Mr. Paterson, the farmer, who was what you would now call
a Radical, though at that time some called him a Priestley-ite, and some
a Fox-ite, and nearly everybody a traitor.  It certainly seemed to me at
the time to be very wicked that a man should look glum when he heard of a
British victory; and when they burned his straw image at the gate of his
farm, Boy Jim and I were among those who lent a hand.  But we were bound
to confess that he was game, though he might be a traitor, for down he
came, striding into the midst of us with his brown coat and his buckled
shoes, and the fire beating upon his grim, schoolmaster face.  My word,
how he rated us, and how glad we were at last to sneak quietly away.

�You livers of a lie!� said he.  �You and those like you have been
preaching peace for nigh two thousand years, and cutting throats the
whole time.  If the money that is lost in taking French lives were spent
in saving English ones, you would have more right to burn candles in your
windows.  Who are you that dare to come here to insult a law-abiding
man?�

�We are the people of England!� cried young Master Ovington, the son of
the Tory Squire.

�You! you horse-racing, cock-fighting ne�er-do-weel!  Do you presume to
talk for the people of England?  They are a deep, strong, silent stream,
and you are the scum, the bubbles, the poor, silly froth that floats upon
the surface.�

We thought him very wicked then, but, looking back, I am not sure that we
were not very wicked ourselves.

And then there were the smugglers!  The Downs swarmed with them, for
since there might be no lawful trade betwixt France and England, it had
all to run in that channel.  I have been up on St. John�s Common upon a
dark night, and, lying among the bracken, I have seen as many as seventy
mules and a man at the head of each go flitting past me as silently as
trout in a stream.  Not one of them but bore its two ankers of the right
French cognac, or its bale of silk of Lyons and lace of Valenciennes.  I
knew Dan Scales, the head of them, and I knew Tom Hislop, the riding
officer, and I remember the night they met.

�Do you fight, Dan?� asked Tom.

�Yes, Tom; thou must fight for it.�

On which Tom drew his pistol, and blew Dan�s brains out.

�It was a sad thing to do,� he said afterwards, �but I knew Dan was too
good a man for me, for we tried it out before.�

It was Tom who paid a poet from Brighton to write the lines for the
tombstone, which we all thought were very true and good, beginning�

   �Alas!  Swift flew the fatal lead
   Which pierc�d through the young man�s head.
   He instantly fell, resigned his breath,
   And closed his languid eyes in death.�

There was more of it, and I dare say it is all still to be read in
Patcham Churchyard.

One day, about the time of our Cliffe Royal adventure, I was seated in
the cottage looking round at the curios which my father had fastened on
to the walls, and wishing, like the lazy lad that I was, that Mr. Lilly
had died before ever he wrote his Latin grammar, when my mother, who was
sitting knitting in the window, gave a little cry of surprise.

�Good gracious!� she cried.  �What a vulgar-looking woman!�

It was so rare to hear my mother say a hard word against anybody (unless
it were General Buonaparte) that I was across the room and at the window
in a jump.  A pony-chaise was coming slowly down the village street, and
in it was the queerest-looking person that I had ever seen.  She was very
stout, with a face that was of so dark a red that it shaded away into
purple over the nose and cheeks.  She wore a great hat with a white
curling ostrich feather, and from under its brim her two bold, black eyes
stared out with a look of anger and defiance as if to tell the folk that
she thought less of them than they could do of her.  She had some sort of
scarlet pelisse with white swans-down about her neck, and she held the
reins slack in her hands, while the pony wandered from side to side of
the road as the fancy took him.  Each time the chaise swayed, her head
with the great hat swayed also, so that sometimes we saw the crown of it
and sometimes the brim.

�What a dreadful sight!� cried my mother.

�What is amiss with her, mother?�

�Heaven forgive me if I misjudge her, Rodney, but I think that the
unfortunate woman has been drinking.�

�Why,� I cried, �she has pulled the chaise up at the smithy.  I�ll find
out all the news for you;� and, catching up my cap, away I scampered.

Champion Harrison had been shoeing a horse at the forge door, and when I
got into the street I could see him with the creature�s hoof still under
his arm, and the rasp in his hand, kneeling down amid the white parings.
The woman was beckoning him from the chaise, and he staring up at her
with the queerest expression upon his face.  Presently he threw down his
rasp and went across to her, standing by the wheel and shaking his head
as he talked to her.  For my part, I slipped into the smithy, where Boy
Jim was finishing the shoe, and I watched the neatness of his work and
the deft way in which he turned up the caulkens.  When he had done with
it he carried it out, and there was the strange woman still talking with
his uncle.

�Is that he?� I heard her ask.

Champion Harrison nodded.

She looked at Jim, and I never saw such eyes in a human head, so large,
and black, and wonderful.  Boy as I was, I knew that, in spite of that
bloated face, this woman had once been very beautiful.  She put out a
hand, with all the fingers going as if she were playing on the
harpsichord, and she touched Jim on the shoulder.

�I hope�I hope you�re well,� she stammered.

�Very well, ma�am,� said Jim, staring from her to his uncle.

�And happy too?�

�Yes, ma�am, I thank you.�

�Nothing that you crave for?�

�Why, no, ma�am, I have all that I lack.�

�That will do, Jim,� said his uncle, in a stern voice.  �Blow up the
forge again, for that shoe wants reheating.�

But it seemed as if the woman had something else that she would say, for
she was angry that he should be sent away.  Her eyes gleamed, and her
head tossed, while the smith with his two big hands outspread seemed to
be soothing her as best he could.  For a long time they whispered until
at last she appeared to be satisfied.

�To-morrow, then?� she cried loud out.

�To-morrow,� he answered.

�You keep your word and I�ll keep mine,� said she, and dropped the lash
on the pony�s back.  The smith stood with the rasp in his hand, looking
after her until she was just a little red spot on the white road.  Then
he turned, and I never saw his face so grave.

�Jim,� said he, �that�s Miss Hinton, who has come to live at The Maples,
out Anstey Cross way.  She�s taken a kind of a fancy to you, Jim, and
maybe she can help you on a bit.  I promised her that you would go over
and see her to-morrow.�

�I don�t want her help, uncle, and I don�t want to see her.�

�But I�ve promised, Jim, and you wouldn�t make me out a liar.  She does
but want to talk with you, for it is a lonely life she leads.�

�What would she want to talk with such as me about?�

�Why, I cannot say that, but she seemed very set upon it, and women have
their fancies.  There�s young Master Stone here who wouldn�t refuse to go
and see a good lady, I�ll warrant, if he thought he might better his
fortune by doing so.�

�Well, uncle, I�ll go if Roddy Stone will go with me,� said Jim.

�Of course he�ll go.  Won�t you, Master Rodney?�

So it ended in my saying �yes,� and back I went with all my news to my
mother, who dearly loved a little bit of gossip.  She shook her head when
she heard where I was going, but she did not say nay, and so it was
settled.

It was a good four miles of a walk, but when we reached it you would not
wish to see a more cosy little house: all honeysuckle and creepers, with
a wooden porch and lattice windows.  A common-looking woman opened the
door for us.

�Miss Hinton cannot see you,� said she.

�But she asked us to come,� said Jim.

�I can�t help that,� cried the woman, in a rude voice.  �I tell you that
she can�t see you.�

We stood irresolute for a minute.

�Maybe you would just tell her I am here,� said Jim, at last.

�Tell her!  How am I to tell her when she couldn�t so much as hear a
pistol in her ears?  Try and tell her yourself, if you have a mind to.�

She threw open a door as she spoke, and there, in a reclining chair at
the further end of the room, we caught a glimpse of a figure all lumped
together, huge and shapeless, with tails of black hair hanging down.

The sound of dreadful, swine-like breathing fell upon our ears.  It was
but a glance, and then we were off hot-foot for home.  As for me, I was
so young that I was not sure whether this was funny or terrible; but when
I looked at Jim to see how he took it, he was looking quite white and
ill.

�You�ll not tell any one, Roddy,� said he.

�Not unless it�s my mother.�

�I won�t even tell my uncle.  I�ll say she was ill, the poor lady! it�s
enough that we should have seen her in her shame, without its being the
gossip of the village.  It makes me feel sick and heavy at heart.�

�She was so yesterday, Jim.�

�Was she?  I never marked it.  But I know that she has kind eyes and a
kind heart, for I saw the one in the other when she looked at me.  Maybe
it�s the want of a friend that has driven her to this.�

It blighted his spirits for days, and when it had all gone from my mind
it was brought back to me by his manner.  But it was not to be our last
memory of the lady with the scarlet pelisse, for before the week was out
Jim came round to ask me if I would again go up with him.

�My uncle has had a letter,� said he.  �She would speak with me, and I
would be easier if you came with me, Rod.�

For me it was only a pleasure outing, but I could see, as we drew near
the house, that Jim was troubling in his mind lest we should find that
things were amiss.

His fears were soon set at rest, however, for we had scarce clicked the
garden gate before the woman was out of the door of the cottage and
running down the path to meet us.  She was so strange a figure, with some
sort of purple wrapper on, and her big, flushed face smiling out of it,
that I might, if I had been alone, have taken to my heels at the sight of
her.  Even Jim stopped for a moment as if he were not very sure of
himself, but her hearty ways soon set us at our ease.

�It is indeed good of you to come and see an old, lonely woman,� said
she, �and I owe you an apology that I should give you a fruitless journey
on Tuesday, but in a sense you were yourselves the cause of it, since the
thought of your coming had excited me, and any excitement throws me into
a nervous fever.  My poor nerves!  You can see for yourselves how they
serve me.�

She held out her twitching hands as she spoke.  Then she passed one of
them through Jim�s arm, and walked with him up the path.

�You must let me know you, and know you well,� said she.  �Your uncle and
aunt are quite old acquaintances of mine, and though you cannot remember
me, I have held you in my arms when you were an infant.  Tell me, little
man,� she added, turning to me, �what do you call your friend?�

�Boy Jim, ma�am,� said I.

�Then if you will not think me forward, I will call you Boy Jim also.  We
elderly people have our privileges, you know.  And now you shall come in
with me, and we will take a dish of tea together.�

She led the way into a cosy room�the same which we had caught a glimpse
of when last we came�and there, in the middle, was a table with white
napery, and shining glass, and gleaming china, and red-cheeked apples
piled upon a centre-dish, and a great plateful of smoking muffins which
the cross-faced maid had just carried in.  You can think that we did
justice to all the good things, and Miss Hinton would ever keep pressing
us to pass our cup and to fill our plate.  Twice during our meal she rose
from her chair and withdrew into a cupboard at the end of the room, and
each time I saw Jim�s face cloud, for we heard a gentle clink of glass
against glass.

�Come now, little man,� said she to me, when the table had been cleared.
�Why are you looking round so much?�

�Because there are so many pretty things upon the walls.�

�And which do you think the prettiest of them?�

�Why, that!� said I, pointing to a picture which hung opposite to me.  It
was of a tall and slender girl, with the rosiest cheeks and the tenderest
eyes�so daintily dressed, too, that I had never seen anything more
perfect.  She had a posy of flowers in her hand and another one was lying
upon the planks of wood upon which she was standing.

�Oh, that�s the prettiest, is it?� said she, laughing.  �Well, now, walk
up to it, and let us hear what is writ beneath it.�

I did as she asked, and read out: �Miss Polly Hinton, as �Peggy,� in _The
Country Wife_, played for her benefit at the Haymarket Theatre, September
14th, 1782.�

�It�s a play-actress,� said I.

�Oh, you rude little boy, to say it in such a tone,� said she; �as if a
play-actress wasn�t as good as any one else.  Why, �twas but the other
day that the Duke of Clarence, who may come to call himself King of
England, married Mrs. Jordan, who is herself only a play-actress.  And
whom think you that this one is?�

She stood under the picture with her arms folded across her great body,
and her big black eyes looking from one to the other of us.

�Why, where are your eyes?� she cried at last.  �_I_ was Miss Polly
Hinton of the Haymarket Theatre.  And perhaps you never heard the name
before?�

We were compelled to confess that we never had.  And the very name of
play-actress had filled us both with a kind of vague horror, like the
country-bred folk that we were.  To us they were a class apart, to be
hinted at rather than named, with the wrath of the Almighty hanging over
them like a thundercloud.  Indeed, His judgments seemed to be in visible
operation before us when we looked upon what this woman was, and what she
had been.

�Well,� said she, laughing like one who is hurt, �you have no cause to
say anything, for I read on your face what you have been taught to think
of me.  So this is the upbringing that you have had, Jim�to think evil of
that which you do not understand!  I wish you had been in the theatre
that very night with Prince Florizel and four Dukes in the boxes, and all
the wits and macaronis of London rising at me in the pit.  If Lord Avon
had not given me a cast in his carriage, I had never got my flowers back
to my lodgings in York Street, Westminster.  And now two little country
lads are sitting in judgment upon me!�

Jim�s pride brought a flush on to his cheeks, for he did not like to be
called a country lad, or to have it supposed that he was so far behind
the grand folk in London.

�I have never been inside a play-house,� said he; �I know nothing of
them.�

�Nor I either.�

�Well,� said she, �I am not in voice, and it is ill to play in a little
room with but two to listen, but you must conceive me to be the Queen of
the Peruvians, who is exhorting her countrymen to rise up against the
Spaniards, who are oppressing them.�

And straightway that coarse, swollen woman became a queen�the grandest,
haughtiest queen that you could dream of�and she turned upon us with such
words of fire, such lightning eyes and sweeping of her white hand, that
she held us spellbound in our chairs.  Her voice was soft and sweet, and
persuasive at the first, but louder it rang and louder as it spoke of
wrongs and freedom and the joys of death in a good cause, until it
thrilled into my every nerve, and I asked nothing more than to run out of
the cottage and to die then and there in the cause of my country.  And
then in an instant she changed.  She was a poor woman now, who had lost
her only child, and who was bewailing it.  Her voice was full of tears,
and what she said was so simple, so true, that we both seemed to see the
dead babe stretched there on the carpet before us, and we could have
joined in with words of pity and of grief.  And then, before our cheeks
were dry, she was back into her old self again.

�How like you that, then?� she cried.  �That was my way in the days when
Sally Siddons would turn green at the name of Polly Hinton.  It�s a fine
play, is _Pizarro_.�

�And who wrote it, ma�am?�

�Who wrote it?  I never heard.  What matter who did the writing of it!
But there are some great lines for one who knows how they should be
spoken.�

�And you play no longer, ma�am?�

�No, Jim, I left the boards when�when I was weary of them.  But my heart
goes back to them sometimes.  It seems to me there is no smell like that
of the hot oil in the footlights and of the oranges in the pit.  But you
are sad, Jim.�

�It was but the thought of that poor woman and her child.�

�Tut, never think about her!  I will soon wipe her from your mind.  This
is �Miss Priscilla Tomboy,� from _The Romp_.  You must conceive that the
mother is speaking, and that the forward young minx is answering.�

And she began a scene between the two of them, so exact in voice and
manner that it seemed to us as if there were really two folk before us:
the stern old mother with her hand up like an ear-trumpet, and her
flouncing, bouncing daughter.  Her great figure danced about with a
wonderful lightness, and she tossed her head and pouted her lips as she
answered back to the old, bent figure that addressed her.  Jim and I had
forgotten our tears, and were holding our ribs before she came to the end
of it.

�That is better,� said she, smiling at our laughter.  �I would not have
you go back to Friar�s Oak with long faces, or maybe they would not let
you come to me again.�

She vanished into her cupboard, and came out with a bottle and glass,
which she placed upon the table.

�You are too young for strong waters,� she said, �but this talking gives
one a dryness, and��

Then it was that Boy Jim did a wonderful thing.  He rose from his chair,
and he laid his hand upon the bottle.

�Don�t!� said he.

She looked him in the face, and I can still see those black eyes of hers
softening before the gaze.

�Am I to have none?�

�Please, don�t.�

With a quick movement she wrested the bottle out of his hand and raised
it up so that for a moment it entered my head that she was about to drink
it off.  Then she flung it through the open lattice, and we heard the
crash of it on the path outside.

�There, Jim!� said she; �does that satisfy you?  It�s long since any one
cared whether I drank or no.�

�You are too good and kind for that,� said he.

�Good!� she cried.  �Well, I love that you should think me so.  And it
would make you happier if I kept from the brandy, Jim?  Well, then, I�ll
make you a promise, if you�ll make me one in return.�

�What�s that, miss?�

�No drop shall pass my lips, Jim, if you will swear, wet or shine, blow
or snow, to come up here twice in every week, that I may see you and
speak with you, for, indeed, there are times when I am very lonesome.�

So the promise was made, and very faithfully did Jim keep it, for many a
time when I have wanted him to go fishing or rabbit-snaring, he has
remembered that it was his day for Miss Hinton, and has tramped off to
Anstey Cross.  At first I think that she found her share of the bargain
hard to keep, and I have seen Jim come back with a black face on him, as
if things were going amiss.  But after a time the fight was won�as all
fights are won if one does but fight long enough�and in the year before
my father came back Miss Hinton had become another woman.  And it was not
her ways only, but herself as well, for from being the person that I have
described, she became in one twelve-month as fine a looking lady as there
was in the whole country-side.  Jim was prouder of it by far than of
anything he had had a hand in in his life, but it was only to me that he
ever spoke about it, for he had that tenderness towards her that one has
for those whom one has helped.  And she helped him also, for by her talk
of the world and of what she had seen, she took his mind away from the
Sussex country-side and prepared it for a broader life beyond.  So
matters stood between them at the time when peace was made and my father
came home from the sea.




CHAPTER IV.
THE PEACE OF AMIENS.


MANY a woman�s knee was on the ground, and many a woman�s soul spent
itself in joy and thankfulness when the news came with the fall of the
leaf in 1801 that the preliminaries of peace had been settled.  All
England waved her gladness by day and twinkled it by night.  Even in
little Friar�s Oak we had our flags flying bravely, and a candle in every
window, with a big G.R. guttering in the wind over the door of the inn.
Folk were weary of the war, for we had been at it for eight years, taking
Holland, and Spain, and France each in turn and all together.  All that
we had learned during that time was that our little army was no match for
the French on land, and that our large navy was more than a match for
them upon the water.  We had gained some credit, which we were sorely in
need of after the American business; and a few Colonies, which were
welcome also for the same reason; but our debt had gone on rising and our
consols sinking, until even Pitt stood aghast.  Still, if we had known
that there never could be peace between Napoleon and ourselves, and that
this was only the end of a round and not of the battle, we should have
been better advised had we fought it out without a break.  As it was, the
French got back the twenty thousand good seamen whom we had captured, and
a fine dance they led us with their Boulogne flotillas and fleets of
invasion before we were able to catch them again.

My father, as I remember him best, was a tough, strong little man, of no
great breadth, but solid and well put together.  His face was burned of a
reddish colour, as bright as a flower-pot, and in spite of his age (for
he was only forty at the time of which I speak) it was shot with lines,
which deepened if he were in any way perturbed, so that I have seen him
turn on the instant from a youngish man to an elderly.  His eyes
especially were meshed round with wrinkles, as is natural for one who had
puckered them all his life in facing foul wind and bitter weather.  These
eyes were, perhaps, his strangest feature, for they were of a very clear
and beautiful blue, which shone the brighter out of that ruddy setting.
By nature he must have been a fair-skinned man, for his upper brow, where
his cap came over it, was as white as mine, and his close-cropped hair
was tawny.

He had served, as he was proud to say, in the last of our ships which had
been chased out of the Mediterranean in �97, and in the first which had
re-entered it in �98.  He was under Miller, as third lieutenant of the
_Theseus_, when our fleet, like a pack of eager fox hounds in a covert,
was dashing from Sicily to Syria and back again to Naples, trying to pick
up the lost scent.  With the same good fighting man he served at the
Nile, where the men of his command sponged and rammed and trained until,
when the last tricolour had come down, they hove up the sheet anchor and
fell dead asleep upon the top of each other under the capstan bars.
Then, as a second lieutenant, he was in one of those grim three-deckers
with powder-blackened hulls and crimson scupper-holes, their spare cables
tied round their keels and over their bulwarks to hold them together,
which carried the news into the Bay of Naples.  From thence, as a reward
for his services, he was transferred as first lieutenant to the _Aurora_
frigate, engaged in cutting off supplies from Genoa, and in her he still
remained until long after peace was declared.

How well I can remember his home-coming!  Though it is now
eight-and-forty years ago, it is clearer to me than the doings of last
week, for the memory of an old man is like one of those glasses which
shows out what is at a distance and blurs all that is near.

My mother had been in a tremble ever since the first rumour of the
preliminaries came to our ears, for she knew that he might come as soon
as his message.  She said little, but she saddened my life by insisting
that I should be for ever clean and tidy.  With every rumble of wheels,
too, her eyes would glance towards the door, and her hands steal up to
smooth her pretty black hair.  She had embroidered a white �Welcome� upon
a blue ground, with an anchor in red upon each side, and a border of
laurel leaves; and this was to hang upon the two lilac bushes which
flanked the cottage door.  He could not have left the Mediterranean
before we had this finished, and every morning she looked to see if it
were in its place and ready to be hanged.

But it was a weary time before the peace was ratified, and it was April
of next year before our great day came round to us.  It had been raining
all morning, I remember�a soft spring rain, which sent up a rich smell
from the brown earth and pattered pleasantly upon the budding chestnuts
behind our cottage.  The sun had shone out in the evening, and I had come
down with my fishing-rod (for I had promised Boy Jim to go with him to
the mill-stream), when what should I see but a post-chaise with two
smoking horses at the gate, and there in the open door of it were my
mother�s black skirt and her little feet jutting out, with two blue arms
for a waist-belt, and all the rest of her buried in the chaise.  Away I
ran for the motto, and I pinned it up on the bushes as we had agreed, but
when I had finished there were the skirts and the feet and the blue arms
just the same as before.

�Here�s Rod,� said my mother at last, struggling down on to the ground
again.  �Roddy, darling, here�s your father!�

I saw the red face and the kindly, light-blue eyes looking out at me.

�Why, Roddy, lad, you were but a child and we kissed good-bye when last
we met; but I suppose we must put you on a different rating now.  I�m
right glad from my heart to see you, dear lad; and as to you,
sweetheart��

The blue arms flew out, and there were the skirt and the two feet fixed
in the door again.

�Here are the folk coming, Anson,� said my mother, blushing.  �Won�t you
get out and come in with us?�

And then suddenly it came home to us both that for all his cheery face he
had never moved more than his arms, and that his leg was resting on the
opposite seat of the chaise.

�Oh, Anson, Anson!� she cried.

�Tut, �tis but the bone of my leg,� said he, taking his knee between his
hands and lifting it round.  �I got it broke in the Bay, but the surgeon
has fished it and spliced it, though it�s a bit crank yet.  Why, bless
her kindly heart, if I haven�t turned her from pink to white.  You can
see for yourself that it�s nothing.�

He sprang out as he spoke, and with one leg and a staff he hopped swiftly
up the path, and under the laurel-bordered motto, and so over his own
threshold for the first time for five years.  When the post-boy and I had
carried up the sea-chest and the two canvas bags, there he was sitting in
his armchair by the window in his old weather-stained blue coat.  My
mother was weeping over his poor leg, and he patting her hair with one
brown hand.  His other he threw round my waist, and drew me to the side
of his chair.

�Now that we have peace, I can lie up and refit until King George needs
me again,� said he.  ��Twas a carronade that came adrift in the Bay when
it was blowing a top-gallant breeze with a beam sea.  Ere we could make
it fast it had me jammed against the mast.  Well, well,� he added,
looking round at the walls of the room, �here are all my old curios, the
same as ever: the narwhal�s horn from the Arctic, and the blowfish from
the Moluccas, and the paddles from Fiji, and the picture of the _Ca Ira_
with Lord Hotham in chase.  And here you are, Mary, and you also, Roddy,
and good luck to the carronade which has sent me into so snug a harbour
without fear of sailing orders.�

My mother had his long pipe and his tobacco all ready for him, so that he
was able now to light it and to sit looking from one of us to the other
and then back again, as if he could never see enough of us.  Young as I
was, I could still understand that this was the moment which he had
thought of during many a lonely watch, and that the expectation of it had
cheered his heart in many a dark hour.  Sometimes he would touch one of
us with his hand, and sometimes the other, and so he sat, with his soul
too satiated for words, whilst the shadows gathered in the little room
and the lights of the inn windows glimmered through the gloom.  And then,
after my mother had lit our own lamp, she slipped suddenly down upon her
knees, and he got one knee to the ground also, so that, hand-in-hand,
they joined their thanks to Heaven for manifold mercies.  When I look
back at my parents as they were in those days, it is at that very moment
that I can picture them most clearly: her sweet face with the wet shining
upon her cheeks, and his blue eyes upturned to the smoke-blackened
ceiling.  I remember that he swayed his reeking pipe in the earnestness
of his prayer, so that I was half tears and half smiles as I watched him.

�Roddy, lad,� said he, after supper was over, �you�re getting a man now,
and I suppose you will go afloat like the rest of us.  You�re old enough
to strap a dirk to your thigh.�

�And leave me without a child as well as without a husband!� cried my
mother.

�Well, there�s time enough yet,� said he, �for they are more inclined to
empty berths than to fill them, now that peace has come.  But I�ve never
tried what all this schooling has done for you, Rodney.  You have had a
great deal more than ever I had, but I dare say I can make shift to test
it.  Have you learned history?�

�Yes, father,� said I, with some confidence.

�Then how many sail of the line were at the Battle of Camperdown?�

He shook his head gravely when he found that I could not answer him.

�Why, there are men in the fleet who never had any schooling at all who
could tell you that we had seven 74�s, seven 64�s, and two 50-gun ships
in the action.  There�s a picture on the wall of the chase of the _Ca
Ira_.  Which were the ships that laid her aboard?�

Again I had to confess that he had beaten me.

�Well, your dad can teach you something in history yet,� he cried,
looking in triumph at my mother.  �Have you learned geography?�

�Yes, father,� said I, though with less confidence than before.

�Well, how far is it from Port Mahon to Algeciras?�

I could only shake my head.

�If Ushant lay three leagues upon your starboard quarter, what would be
your nearest English port?�

Again I had to give it up.

�Well, I don�t see that your geography is much better than your history,�
said he.  �You�d never get your certificate at this rate.  Can you do
addition?  Well, then, let us see if you can tot up my prize-money.�

He shot a mischievous glance at my mother as he spoke, and she laid down
her knitting on her lap and looked very earnestly at him.

�You never asked me about that, Mary,� said he.

�The Mediterranean is not the station for it, Anson.  I have heard you
say that it is the Atlantic for prize-money, and the Mediterranean for
honour.�

�I had a share of both last cruise, which comes from changing a
line-of-battleship for a frigate.  Now, Rodney, there are two pounds in
every hundred due to me when the prize-courts have done with them.  When
we were watching Massena, off Genoa, we got a matter of seventy
schooners, brigs, and tartans, with wine, food, and powder.  Lord Keith
will want his finger in the pie, but that�s for the Courts to settle.
Put them at four pounds apiece to me, and what will the seventy bring?�

�Two hundred and eighty pounds,� I answered.

�Why, Anson, it is a fortune!� cried my mother, clapping her hands.

�Try you again, Roddy!� said he, shaking his pipe at me.  �There was the
_Xebec_ frigate out of Barcelona with twenty thousand Spanish dollars
aboard, which make four thousand of our pounds.  Her hull should be worth
another thousand.  What�s my share of that?�

�A hundred pounds.�

�Why, the purser couldn�t work it out quicker,� he cried in his delight.
�Here�s for you again!  We passed the Straits and worked up to the
Azores, where we fell in with the _La Sabina_ from the Mauritius with
sugar and spices.  Twelve hundred pounds she�s worth to me, Mary, my
darling, and never again shall you soil your pretty fingers or pinch upon
my beggarly pay.�

My dear mother had borne her long struggle without a sign all these
years, but now that she was so suddenly eased of it she fell sobbing upon
his neck.  It was a long time before my father had a thought to spare
upon my examination in arithmetic.

�It�s all in your lap, Mary,� said he, dashing his own hand across his
eyes.  �By George, lass, when this leg of mine is sound we�ll bear down
for a spell to Brighton, and if there is a smarter frock than yours upon
the Steyne, may I never tread a poop again.  But how is it that you are
so quick at figures, Rodney, when you know nothing of history or
geography?�

I tried to explain that addition was the same upon sea or land, but that
history and geography were not.

�Well,� he concluded, �you need figures to take a reckoning, and you need
nothing else save what your mother wit will teach you.  There never was
one of our breed who did not take to salt water like a young gull.  Lord
Nelson has promised me a vacancy for you, and he�ll be as good as his
word.�

So it was that my father came home to us, and a better or kinder no lad
could wish for.  Though my parents had been married so long, they had
really seen very little of each other, and their affection was as warm
and as fresh as if they were two newly-wedded lovers.  I have learned
since that sailors can be coarse and foul, but never did I know it from
my father; for, although he had seen as much rough work as the wildest
could wish for, he was always the same patient, good-humoured man, with a
smile and a jolly word for all the village.  He could suit himself to his
company, too, for on the one hand he could take his wine with the vicar,
or with Sir James Ovington, the squire of the parish; while on the other
he would sit by the hour amongst my humble friends down in the smithy,
with Champion Harrison, Boy Jim, and the rest of them, telling them such
stories of Nelson and his men that I have seen the Champion knot his
great hands together, while Jim�s eyes have smouldered like the forge
embers as he listened.

My father had been placed on half-pay, like so many others of the old war
officers, and so, for nearly two years, he was able to remain with us.
During all this time I can only once remember that there was the
slightest disagreement between him and my mother.  It chanced that I was
the cause of it, and as great events sprang out of it, I must tell you
how it came about.  It was indeed the first of a series of events which
affected not only my fortunes, but those of very much more important
people.

The spring of 1803 was an early one, and the middle of April saw the
leaves thick upon the chestnut trees.  One evening we were all seated
together over a dish of tea when we heard the scrunch of steps outside
our door, and there was the postman with a letter in his hand.

�I think it is for me,� said my mother, and sure enough it was addressed
in the most beautiful writing to Mrs. Mary Stone, of Friar�s Oak, and
there was a red seal the size of a half-crown upon the outside of it with
a flying dragon in the middle.

�Whom think you that it is from, Anson?� she asked.

�I had hoped that it was from Lord Nelson,� answered my father.  �It is
time the boy had his commission.  But if it be for you, then it cannot be
from any one of much importance.�

�Can it not!� she cried, pretending to be offended.  �You will ask my
pardon for that speech, sir, for it is from no less a person than Sir
Charles Tregellis, my own brother.�

My mother seemed to speak with a hushed voice when she mentioned this
wonderful brother of hers, and always had done as long as I can remember,
so that I had learned also to have a subdued and reverent feeling when I
heard his name.  And indeed it was no wonder, for that name was never
mentioned unless it were in connection with something brilliant and
extraordinary.  Once we heard that he was at Windsor with the King.
Often he was at Brighton with the Prince.  Sometimes it was as a
sportsman that his reputation reached us, as when his Meteor beat the
Duke of Queensberry�s Egham, at Newmarket, or when he brought Jim Belcher
up from Bristol, and sprang him upon the London fancy.  But usually it
was as the friend of the great, the arbiter of fashions, the king of
bucks, and the best-dressed man in town that his reputation reached us.
My father, however, did not appear to be elated at my mother�s triumphant
rejoinder.

�Ay, and what does he want?� asked he, in no very amiable voice.

�I wrote to him, Anson, and told him that Rodney was growing a man now,
thinking, since he had no wife or child of his own, he might be disposed
to advance him.�

�We can do very well without him,� growled my father.  �He sheered off
from us when the weather was foul, and we have no need of him now that
the sun is shining.�

�Nay, you misjudge him, Anson,� said my mother, warmly.  �There is no one
with a better heart than Charles; but his own life moves so smoothly that
he cannot understand that others may have trouble.  During all these
years I have known that I had but to say the word to receive as much as I
wished from him.�

�Thank God that you never had to stoop to it, Mary.  I want none of his
help.�

�But we must think of Rodney.�

�Rodney has enough for his sea-chest and kit.  He needs no more.�

�But Charles has great power and influence in London.  He could make
Rodney known to all the great people.  Surely you would not stand in the
way of his advancement.�

�Let us hear what he says, then,� said my father; and this was the letter
which she read to him�

                                           14, Jermyn Street, St. James�s,
                                                        �April 15th, 1803.

    �MY DEAR SISTER MARY,

    �In answer to your letter, I can assure you that you must not
    conceive me to be wanting in those finer feelings which are the chief
    adornment of humanity.  It is true that for some years, absorbed as I
    have been in affairs of the highest importance, I have seldom taken a
    pen in hand, for which I can assure you that I have been reproached
    by many _des plus charmantes_ of your charming sex.  At the present
    moment I lie abed (having stayed late in order to pay a compliment to
    the Marchioness of Dover at her ball last night), and this is writ to
    my dictation by Ambrose, my clever rascal of a valet.  I am
    interested to hear of my nephew Rodney (_Mon dieu_, _quel nom_!), and
    as I shall be on my way to visit the Prince at Brighton next week, I
    shall break my journey at Friar�s Oak for the sake of seeing both you
    and him.  Make my compliments to your husband.

                                          �I am ever, my dear sister Mary,
                                                            �Your brother,
                                                      �CHARLES TREGELLIS.�

�What do you think of that?� cried my mother in triumph when she had
finished.

�I think it is the letter of a fop,� said my father, bluntly.

�You are too hard on him, Anson.  You will think better of him when you
know him.  But he says that he will be here next week, and this is
Thursday, and the best curtains unhung, and no lavender in the sheets!�

Away she bustled, half distracted, while my father sat moody, with his
chin upon his hands, and I remained lost in wonder at the thought of this
grand new relative from London, and of all that his coming might mean to
us.




CHAPTER V.
BUCK TREGELLIS.


NOW that I was in my seventeenth year, and had already some need for a
razor, I had begun to weary of the narrow life of the village, and to
long to see something of the great world beyond.  The craving was all the
stronger because I durst not speak openly about it, for the least hint of
it brought the tears into my mother�s eyes.  But now there was the less
reason that I should stay at home, since my father was at her side, and
so my mind was all filled by this prospect of my uncle�s visit, and of
the chance that he might set my feet moving at last upon the road of
life.

As you may think, it was towards my father�s profession that my thoughts
and my hopes turned, for from my childhood I have never seen the heave of
the sea or tasted the salt upon my lips without feeling the blood of five
generations of seamen thrill within my veins.  And think of the challenge
which was ever waving in those days before the eyes of a coast-living
lad!  I had but to walk up to Wolstonbury in the war time to see the
sails of the French chasse-mar�es and privateers.  Again and again I have
heard the roar of the guns coming from far out over the waters.  Seamen
would tell us how they had left London and been engaged ere nightfall, or
sailed out of Portsmouth and been yard-arm to yard-arm before they had
lost sight of St. Helen�s light.  It was this imminence of the danger
which warmed our hearts to our sailors, and made us talk, round the
winter fires, of our little Nelson, and Cuddie Collingwood, and Johnnie
Jarvis, and the rest of them, not as being great High Admirals with
titles and dignities, but as good friends whom we loved and honoured
above all others.  What boy was there through the length and breadth of
Britain who did not long to be out with them under the red-cross flag?

But now that peace had come, and the fleets which had swept the Channel
and the Mediterranean were lying dismantled in our harbours, there was
less to draw one�s fancy seawards.  It was London now of which I thought
by day and brooded by night: the huge city, the home of the wise and the
great, from which came this constant stream of carriages, and those
crowds of dusty people who were for ever flashing past our window-pane.
It was this one side of life which first presented itself to me, and so,
as a boy, I used to picture the City as a gigantic stable with a huge
huddle of coaches, which were for ever streaming off down the country
roads.  But, then, Champion Harrison told me how the fighting-men lived
there, and my father how the heads of the Navy lived there, and my mother
how her brother and his grand friends were there, until at last I was
consumed with impatience to see this marvellous heart of England.  This
coming of my uncle, then, was the breaking of light through the darkness,
though I hardly dared to hope that he would take me with him into those
high circles in which he lived.  My mother, however, had such confidence
either in his good nature or in her own powers of persuasion, that she
already began to make furtive preparations for my departure.

But if the narrowness of the village life chafed my easy spirit, it was a
torture to the keen and ardent mind of Boy Jim.  It was but a few days
after the coming of my uncle�s letter that we walked over the Downs
together, and I had a peep of the bitterness of his heart.

�What is there for me to do, Rodney?� he cried.  �I forge a shoe, and I
fuller it, and I clip it, and I caulken it, and I knock five holes in it,
and there it is finished.  Then I do it again and again, and blow up the
bellows and feed the forge, and rasp a hoof or two, and there is a day�s
work done, and every day the same as the other.  Was it for this only, do
you think, that I was born into the world?�

I looked at him, his proud, eagle face, and his tall, sinewy figure, and
I wondered whether in the whole land there was a finer, handsomer man.

�The Army or the Navy is the place for you, Jim,� said I.

�That is very well,� he cried.  �If you go into the Navy, as you are
likely to do, you go as an officer, and it is you who do the ordering.
If I go in, it is as one who was born to receive orders.�

�An officer gets his orders from those above him.�

�But an officer does not have the lash hung over his head.  I saw a poor
fellow at the inn here�it was some years ago�who showed us his back in
the tap-room, all cut into red diamonds with the boat-swain�s whip.  �Who
ordered that?� I asked.  �The captain,� said he.  �And what would you
have had if you had struck him dead?� said I.  �The yard-arm,� he
answered.  �Then if I had been you that�s where I should have been,� said
I, and I spoke the truth.  I can�t help it, Rod!  There�s something here
in my heart, something that is as much a part of myself as this hand is,
which holds me to it.�

�I know that you are as proud as Lucifer,� said I.

�It was born with me, Roddy, and I can�t help it.  Life would be easier
if I could.  I was made to be my own master, and there�s only one place
where I can hope to be so.�

�Where is that, Jim?�

�In London.  Miss Hinton has told me of it, until I feel as if I could
find my way through it from end to end.  She loves to talk of it as well
as I do to listen.  I have it all laid out in my mind, and I can see
where the playhouses are, and how the river runs, and where the King�s
house is, and the Prince�s, and the place where the fighting-men live.  I
could make my name known in London.�

�How?�

�Never mind how, Rod.  I could do it, and I will do it, too.  �Wait!�
says my uncle��wait, and it will all come right for you.�  That is what
he always says, and my aunt the same.  Why should I wait?  What am I to
wait for?  No, Roddy, I�ll stay no longer eating my heart out in this
little village, but I�ll leave my apron behind me and I�ll seek my
fortune in London, and when I come back to Friar�s Oak, it will be in
such style as that gentleman yonder.�

He pointed as he spoke, and there was a high crimson curricle coming down
the London road, with two bay mares harnessed tandem fashion before it.
The reins and fittings were of a light fawn colour, and the gentleman had
a driving-coat to match, with a servant in dark livery behind.  They
flashed past us in a rolling cloud of dust, and I had just a glimpse of
the pale, handsome face of the master, and of the dark, shrivelled
features of the man.  I should never have given them another thought had
it not chanced that when the village came into view there was the
curricle again, standing at the door of the inn, and the grooms busy
taking out the horses.

�Jim,� I cried, �I believe it is my uncle!� and taking to my heels I ran
for home at the top of my speed.  At the door was standing the dark-faced
servant.  He carried a cushion, upon which lay a small and fluffy lapdog.

�You will excuse me, young sir,� said he, in the suavest, most soothing
of voices, �but am I right in supposing that this is the house of
Lieutenant Stone?  In that case you will, perhaps, do me the favour to
hand to Mrs. Stone this note which her brother, Sir Charles Tregellis,
has just committed to my care.�

I was quite abashed by the man�s flowery way of talking�so unlike
anything which I had ever heard.  He had a wizened face, and sharp little
dark eyes, which took in me and the house and my mother�s startled face
at the window all in the instant.  My parents were together, the two of
them, in the sitting-room, and my mother read the note to us.

�My dear Mary,� it ran, �I have stopped at the inn, because I am somewhat
_ravag�_ by the dust of your Sussex roads.  A lavender-water bath may
restore me to a condition in which I may fitly pay my compliments to a
lady.  Meantime, I send you Fidelio as a hostage.  Pray give him a
half-pint of warmish milk with six drops of pure brandy in it.  A better
or more faithful creature never lived.  _Toujours � toi_.�Charles.�

�Have him in!  Have him in!� cried my father, heartily, running to the
door.  �Come in, Mr. Fidelio.  Every man to his own taste, and six drops
to the half-pint seems a sinful watering of grog�but if you like it so,
you shall have it.�

A smile flickered over the dark face of the servant, but his features
reset themselves instantly into their usual mask of respectful
observance.

�You are labouring under a slight error, sir, if you will permit me to
say so.  My name is Ambrose, and I have the honour to be the valet of Sir
Charles Tregellis.  This is Fidelio upon the cushion.�

�Tut, the dog!� cried my father, in disgust.  �Heave him down by the
fireside.  Why should he have brandy, when many a Christian has to go
without?�

�Hush, Anson!� said my mother, taking the cushion.  �You will tell Sir
Charles that his wishes shall be carried out, and that we shall expect
him at his own convenience.�

The man went off noiselessly and swiftly, but was back in a few minutes
with a flat brown basket.

�It is the refection, madam,� said he.  �Will you permit me to lay the
table?  Sir Charles is accustomed to partake of certain dishes and to
drink certain wines, so that we usually bring them with us when we
visit.�  He opened the basket, and in a minute he had the table all
shining with silver and glass, and studded with dainty dishes.  So quick
and neat and silent was he in all he did, that my father was as taken
with him as I was.

�You�d have made a right good foretopman if your heart is as stout as
your fingers are quick,� said he.  �Did you never wish to have the honour
of serving your country?�

�It is my honour, sir, to serve Sir Charles Tregellis, and I desire no
other master,� he answered.  �But I will convey his dressing-case from
the inn, and then all will be ready.�

He came back with a great silver-mounted box under his arm, and close at
his heels was the gentleman whose coming had made such a disturbance.

My first impression of my uncle as he entered the room was that one of
his eyes was swollen to the size of an apple.  It caught the breath from
my lips�that monstrous, glistening eye.  But the next instant I perceived
that he held a round glass in the front of it, which magnified it in this
fashion.  He looked at us each in turn, and then he bowed very gracefully
to my mother and kissed her upon either cheek.

�You will permit me to compliment you, my dear Mary,� said he, in a voice
which was the most mellow and beautiful that I have ever heard.  �I can
assure you that the country air has used you wondrous well, and that I
should be proud to see my pretty sister in the Mall.  I am your servant,
sir,� he continued, holding out his hand to my father.  �It was but last
week that I had the honour of dining with my friend, Lord St. Vincent,
and I took occasion to mention you to him.  I may tell you that your name
is not forgotten at the Admiralty, sir, and I hope that I may see you
soon walking the poop of a 74-gun ship of your own.  So this is my
nephew, is it?�  He put a hand upon each of my shoulders in a very
friendly way and looked me up and down.

�How old are you, nephew?� he asked.

�Seventeen, sir.�

�You look older.  You look eighteen, at the least.  I find him very
passable, Mary�very passable, indeed.  He has not the _bel_ air, the
_tournure_�in our uncouth English we have no word for it.  But he is as
healthy as a May-hedge in bloom.�

So within a minute of his entering our door he had got himself upon terms
with all of us, and with so easy and graceful a manner that it seemed as
if he had known us all for years.  I had a good look at him now as he
stood upon the hearthrug with my mother upon one side and my father on
the other.  He was a very large man, with noble shoulders, small waist,
broad hips, well-turned legs, and the smallest of hands and feet.  His
face was pale and handsome, with a prominent chin, a jutting nose, and
large blue staring eyes, in which a sort of dancing, mischievous light
was for ever playing.  He wore a deep brown coat with a collar as high as
his ears and tails as low as his knees.  His black breeches and silk
stockings ended in very small pointed shoes, so highly polished that they
twinkled with every movement.  His vest was of black velvet, open at the
top to show an embroidered shirt-front, with a high, smooth, white cravat
above it, which kept his neck for ever on the stretch.  He stood easily,
with one thumb in the arm-pit, and two fingers of the other hand in his
vest pocket.  It made me proud as I watched him to think that so
magnificent a man, with such easy, masterful ways, should be my own blood
relation, and I could see from my mother�s eyes as they turned towards
him that the same thought was in her mind.

All this time Ambrose had been standing like a dark-clothed, bronze-faced
image by the door, with the big silver-bound box under his arm.  He
stepped forward now into the room.

�Shall I convey it to your bedchamber, Sir Charles?� he asked.

�Ah, pardon me, sister Mary,� cried my uncle, �I am old-fashioned enough
to have principles�an anachronism, I know, in this lax age.  One of them
is never to allow my _batterie de toilette_ out of my sight when I am
travelling.  I cannot readily forget the agonies which I endured some
years ago through neglecting this precaution.  I will do Ambrose the
justice to say that it was before he took charge of my affairs.  I was
compelled to wear the same ruffles upon two consecutive days.  On the
third morning my fellow was so affected by the sight of my condition,
that he burst into tears and laid out a pair which he had stolen from
me.�

As he spoke his face was very grave, but the light in his eyes danced and
gleamed.  He handed his open snuff-box to my father, as Ambrose followed
my mother out of the room.

�You number yourself in an illustrious company by dipping your finger and
thumb into it,� said he.

�Indeed, sir!� said my father, shortly.

�You are free of my box, as being a relative by marriage.  You are free
also, nephew, and I pray you to take a pinch.  It is the most intimate
sign of my goodwill.  Outside ourselves there are four, I think, who have
had access to it�the Prince, of course; Mr Pitt; Monsieur Otto, the
French Ambassador; and Lord Hawkesbury.  I have sometimes thought that I
was premature with Lord Hawkesbury.�

�I am vastly honoured, sir,� said my father, looking suspiciously at his
guest from under his shaggy eyebrows, for with that grave face and those
twinkling eyes it was hard to know how to take him.

�A woman, sir, has her love to bestow,� said my uncle.  �A man has his
snuff-box.  Neither is to be lightly offered.  It is a lapse of taste;
nay, more, it is a breach of morals.  Only the other day, as I was seated
in Watier�s, my box of prime macouba open upon the table beside me, an
Irish bishop thrust in his intrusive fingers.  �Waiter,� I cried, �my box
has been soiled!  Remove it!�  The man meant no insult, you understand,
but that class of people must be kept in their proper sphere.�

�A bishop!� cried my father.  �You draw your line very high, sir.�

�Yes, sir,� said my uncle; �I wish no better epitaph upon my tombstone.�

My mother had in the meanwhile descended, and we all drew up to the
table.

�You will excuse my apparent grossness, Mary, in venturing to bring my
own larder with me.  Abernethy has me under his orders, and I must eschew
your rich country dainties.  A little white wine and a cold bird�it is as
much as the niggardly Scotchman will allow me.�

�We should have you on blockading service when the levanters are
blowing,� said my father.  �Salt junk and weevilly biscuits, with a rib
of a tough Barbary ox when the tenders come in.  You would have your
spare diet there, sir.�

Straightway my uncle began to question him about the sea service, and for
the whole meal my father was telling him of the Nile and of the Toulon
blockade, and the siege of Genoa, and all that he had seen and done.  But
whenever he faltered for a word, my uncle always had it ready for him,
and it was hard to say which knew most about the business.

�No, I read little or nothing,� said he, when my father marvelled where
he got his knowledge.  �The fact is that I can hardly pick up a print
without seeing some allusion to myself: �Sir C. T. does this,� or �Sir C.
T. says the other,� so I take them no longer.  But if a man is in my
position all knowledge comes to him.  The Duke of York tells me of the
Army in the morning, and Lord Spencer chats with me of the Navy in the
afternoon, and Dundas whispers me what is going forward in the Cabinet,
so that I have little need of the _Times_ or the _Morning Chronicle_.�

This set him talking of the great world of London, telling my father
about the men who were his masters at the Admiralty, and my mother about
the beauties of the town, and the great ladies at Almack�s, but all in
the same light, fanciful way, so that one never knew whether to laugh or
to take him gravely.  I think it flattered him to see the way in which we
all three hung upon his words.  Of some he thought highly and of some
lowly, but he made no secret that the highest of all, and the one against
whom all others should be measured, was Sir Charles Tregellis himself.

�As to the King,� said he, �of course, I am _l�ami de famille_ there; and
even with you I can scarce speak freely, as my relations are
confidential.�

�God bless him and keep him from ill!� cried my father.

�It is pleasant to hear you say so,� said my uncle.  �One has to come
into the country to hear honest loyalty, for a sneer and a gibe are more
the fashions in town.  The King is grateful to me for the interest which
I have ever shown in his son.  He likes to think that the Prince has a
man of taste in his circle.�

�And the Prince?� asked my mother.  �Is he well-favoured?�

�He is a fine figure of a man.  At a distance he has been mistaken for
me.  And he has some taste in dress, though he gets slovenly if I am too
long away from him.  I warrant you that I find a crease in his coat
to-morrow.�

We were all seated round the fire by this time, for the evening had
turned chilly.  The lamp was lighted and so also was my father�s pipe.

�I suppose,� said he, �that this is your first visit to Friar�s Oak?�

My uncle�s face turned suddenly very grave and stern.

�It is my first visit for many years,� said he.  �I was but
one-and-twenty years of age when last I came here.  I am not likely to
forget it.�

I knew that he spoke of his visit to Cliffe Royal at the time of the
murder, and I saw by her face that my mother knew it also.  My father,
however, had either never heard of it, or had forgotten the circumstance.

�Was it at the inn you stayed?� he asked.

�I stayed with the unfortunate Lord Avon.  It was the occasion when he
was accused of slaying his younger brother and fled from the country.�

We all fell silent, and my uncle leaned his chin upon his hand, looking
thoughtfully into the fire.  If I do but close my eyes now, I can see the
light upon his proud, handsome face, and see also my dear father,
concerned at having touched upon so terrible a memory, shooting little
slanting glances at him betwixt the puffs of his pipe.

�I dare say that it has happened with you, sir,� said my uncle at last,
�that you have lost some dear messmate, in battle or wreck, and that you
have put him out of your mind in the routine of your daily life, until
suddenly some word or some scene brings him back to your memory, and you
find your sorrow as raw as upon the first day of your loss.�

My father nodded.

�So it is with me to-night.  I never formed a close friendship with a
man�I say nothing of women�save only the once.  That was with Lord Avon.
We were of an age, he a few years perhaps my senior, but our tastes, our
judgments, and our characters were alike, save only that he had in him a
touch of pride such as I have never known in any other man.  Putting
aside the little foibles of a rich young man of fashion, _les
indescr�tions d�une jeunesse dor�e_, I could have sworn that he was as
good a man as I have ever known.�

�How came he, then, to such a crime?� asked my father.

My uncle shook his head.

�Many a time have I asked myself that question, and it comes home to me
more to-night than ever.�

All the jauntiness had gone out of his manner, and he had turned suddenly
into a sad and serious man.

�Was it certain that he did it, Charles?� asked my mother.

My uncle shrugged his shoulders.

�I wish I could think it were not so.  I have thought sometimes that it
was this very pride, turning suddenly to madness, which drove him to it.
You have heard how he returned the money which we had lost?�

�Nay, I have heard nothing of it,� my father answered.

�It is a very old story now, though we have not yet found an end to it.
We had played for two days, the four of us: Lord Avon, his brother
Captain Barrington, Sir Lothian Hume, and myself.  Of the Captain I knew
little, save that he was not of the best repute, and was deep in the
hands of the Jews.  Sir Lothian has made an evil name for himself
since��tis the same Sir Lothian who shot Lord Carton in the affair at
Chalk Farm�but in those days there was nothing against him.  The oldest
of us was but twenty-four, and we gamed on, as I say, until the Captain
had cleared the board.  We were all hit, but our host far the hardest.

�That night�I tell you now what it would be a bitter thing for me to tell
in a court of law�I was restless and sleepless, as often happens when a
man has kept awake over long.  My mind would dwell upon the fall of the
cards, and I was tossing and turning in my bed, when suddenly a cry fell
upon my ears, and then a second louder one, coming from the direction of
Captain Barrington�s room.  Five minutes later I heard steps passing down
the passage, and, without striking a light, I opened my door and peeped
out, thinking that some one was taken unwell.  There was Lord Avon
walking towards me.  In one hand he held a guttering candle and in the
other a brown bag, which chinked as he moved.  His face was all drawn and
distorted�so much so that my question was frozen upon my lips.  Before I
could utter it he turned into his chamber and softly closed the door.

�Next morning I was awakened by finding him at my bedside.

��Charles,� said he, �I cannot abide to think that you should have lost
this money in my house.  You will find it here upon your table.�

�It was in vain that I laughed at his squeamishness, telling him that I
should most certainly have claimed my money had I won, so that it would
be strange indeed if I were not permitted to pay it when I lost.

��Neither I nor my brother will touch it,� said he.  �There it lies, and
you may do what you like about it.�

�He would listen to no argument, but dashed out of the room like a
madman.  But perhaps these details are familiar to you, and God knows
they are painful to me to tell.�

My father was sitting with staring eyes, and his forgotten pipe reeking
in his hand.

�Pray let us hear the end of it, sir,� he cried.

�Well, then, I had finished my toilet in an hour or so�for I was less
exigeant in those days than now�and I met Sir Lothian Hume at breakfast.
His experience had been the same as my own, and he was eager to see
Captain Barrington; and to ascertain why he had directed his brother to
return the money to us.  We were talking the matter over when suddenly I
raised my eyes to the corner of the ceiling, and I saw�I saw��

My uncle had turned quite pale with the vividness of the memory, and he
passed his hand over his eyes.

�It was crimson,� said he, with a shudder��crimson with black cracks, and
from every crack�but I will give you dreams, sister Mary.  Suffice it
that we rushed up the stair which led direct to the Captain�s room, and
there we found him lying with the bone gleaming white through his throat.
A hunting-knife lay in the room�and the knife was Lord Avon�s.  A lace
ruffle was found in the dead man�s grasp�and the ruffle was Lord Avon�s.
Some papers were found charred in the grate�and the papers were Lord
Avon�s.  Oh, my poor friend, in what moment of madness did you come to do
such a deed?�

The light had gone out of my uncle�s eyes and the extravagance from his
manner.  His speech was clear and plain, with none of those strange
London ways which had so amazed me.  Here was a second uncle, a man of
heart and a man of brains, and I liked him better than the first.

�And what said Lord Avon?� cried my father.

�He said nothing.  He went about like one who walks in his sleep, with
horror-stricken eyes.  None dared arrest him until there should be due
inquiry, but when the coroner�s court brought wilful murder against him,
the constables came for him in full cry.  But they found him fled.  There
was a rumour that he had been seen in Westminster in the next week, and
then that he had escaped for America, but nothing more is known.  It will
be a bright day for Sir Lothian Hume when they can prove him dead, for he
is next of kin, and till then he can touch neither title nor estate.�

The telling of this grim story had cast a chill upon all of us.  My uncle
held out his hands towards the blaze, and I noticed that they were as
white as the ruffles which fringed them.

�I know not how things are at Cliffe Royal now,� said he, thoughtfully.
�It was not a cheery house, even before this shadow fell upon it.  A
fitter stage was never set forth for such a tragedy.  But seventeen years
have passed, and perhaps even that horrible ceiling��

�It still bears the stain,� said I.

I know not which of the three was the more astonished, for my mother had
not heard of my adventures of the night.  They never took their wondering
eyes off me as I told my story, and my heart swelled with pride when my
uncle said that we had carried ourselves well, and that he did not think
that many of our age would have stood it as stoutly.

�But as to this ghost, it must have been the creature of your own minds,�
said he.  �Imagination plays us strange tricks, and though I have as
steady a nerve as a man might wish, I cannot answer for what I might see
if I were to stand under that blood-stained ceiling at midnight.�

�Uncle,� said I, �I saw a figure as plainly as I see that fire, and I
heard the steps as clearly as I hear the crackle of the fagots.  Besides,
we could not both be deceived.�

�There is truth in that,� said be, thoughtfully.  �You saw no features,
you say?�

�It was too dark.�

�But only a figure?�

�The dark outline of one.�

�And it retreated up the stairs?�

�Yes.�

�And vanished into the wall?�

�Yes.�

�What part of the wall?� cried a voice from behind us.

My mother screamed, and down came my father�s pipe on to the hearthrug.
I had sprung round with a catch of my breath, and there was the valet,
Ambrose, his body in the shadow of the doorway, his dark face protruded
into the light, and two burning eyes fixed upon mine.

�What the deuce is the meaning of this, sir?� cried my uncle.

It was strange to see the gleam and passion fade out of the man�s face,
and the demure mask of the valet replace it.  His eyes still smouldered,
but his features regained their prim composure in an instant.

�I beg your pardon, Sir Charles,� said he.  �I had come in to ask you if
you had any orders for me, and I did not like to interrupt the young
gentleman�s story.  I am afraid that I have been somewhat carried away by
it.�

�I never knew you forget yourself before,� said my uncle.

�You will, I am sure, forgive me, Sir Charles, if you will call to mind
the relation in which I stood to Lord Avon.�  He spoke with some dignity
of manner, and with a bow he left the room.

�We must make some little allowance,� said my uncle, with a sudden return
to his jaunty manner.  �When a man can brew a dish of chocolate, or tie a
cravat, as Ambrose does, he may claim consideration.  The fact is that
the poor fellow was valet to Lord Avon, that he was at Cliffe Royal upon
the fatal night of which I have spoken, and that he is most devoted to
his old master.  But my talk has been somewhat _triste_, sister Mary, and
now we shall return, if you please, to the dresses of the Countess
Lieven, and the gossip of St. James.�




CHAPTER VI.
ON THE THRESHOLD.


MY father sent me to bed early that night, though I was very eager to
stay up, for every word which this man said held my attention.  His face,
his manner, the large waves and sweeps of his white hands, his easy air
of superiority, his fantastic fashion of talk, all filled me with
interest and wonder.  But, as I afterwards learned, their conversation
was to be about myself and my own prospects, so I was despatched to my
room, whence far into the night I could hear the deep growl of my father
and the rich tones of my uncle, with an occasional gentle murmur from my
mother, as they talked in the room beneath.

I had dropped asleep at last, when I was awakened suddenly by something
wet being pressed against my face, and by two warm arms which were cast
round me.  My mother�s cheek was against my own, and I could hear the
click of her sobs, and feel her quiver and shake in the darkness.  A
faint light stole through the latticed window, and I could dimly see that
she was in white, with her black hair loose upon her shoulders.

�You won�t forget us, Roddy?  You won�t forget us?�

�Why, mother, what is it?�

�Your uncle, Roddy�he is going to take you away from us.�

�When, mother?�

�To-morrow.�

God forgive me, how my heart bounded for joy, when hers, which was within
touch of it, was breaking with sorrow!

�Oh, mother!� I cried.  �To London?�

�First to Brighton, that he may present you to the Prince.  Next day to
London, where you will meet the great people, Roddy, and learn to look
down upon�to look down upon your poor, simple, old-fashioned father and
mother.�

I put my arms about her to console her, but she wept so that, for all my
seventeen years and pride of manhood, it set me weeping also, and with
such a hiccoughing noise, since I had not a woman�s knack of quiet tears,
that it finally turned her own grief to laughter.

�Charles would be flattered if he could see the gracious way in which we
receive his kindness,� said she.  �Be still, Roddy dear, or you will
certainly wake him.�

�I�ll not go if it is to grieve you,� I cried.

�Nay, dear, you must go, for it may be the one great chance of your life.
And think how proud it will make us all when we hear of you in the
company of Charles�s grand friends.  But you will promise me not to
gamble, Roddy?  You heard to-night of the dreadful things which come from
it.�

�I promise you, mother.�

�And you will be careful of wine, Roddy?  You are young and unused to
it.�

�Yes, mother.�

�And play-actresses also, Roddy.  And you will not cast your
underclothing until June is in.  Young Master Overton came by his death
through it.  Think well of your dress, Roddy, so as to do your uncle
credit, for it is the thing for which he is himself most famed.  You have
but to do what he will direct.  But if there is a time when you are not
meeting grand people, you can wear out your country things, for your
brown coat is as good as new, and the blue one, if it were ironed and
relined, would take you through the summer.  I have put out your Sunday
clothes with the nankeen vest, since you are to see the Prince to-morrow,
and you will wear your brown silk stockings and buckle shoes.  Be guarded
in crossing the London streets, for I am told that the hackney coaches
are past all imagining.  Fold your clothes when you go to bed, Roddy, and
do not forget your evening prayers, for, oh, my dear boy, the days of
temptation are at hand, when I will no longer be with you to help you.�

So with advice and guidance both for this world and the next did my
mother, with her soft, warm arms around me, prepare me for the great step
which lay before me.

My uncle did not appear at breakfast in the morning, but Ambrose brewed
him a dish of chocolate and took it to his room.  When at last, about
midday, he did descend, he was so fine with his curled hair, his shining
teeth, his quizzing glass, his snow-white ruffles, and his laughing eyes,
that I could not take my gaze from him.

�Well, nephew,� he cried, �what do you think of the prospect of coming to
town with me?�

�I thank you, sir, for the kind interest which you take in me,� said I.

�But you must be a credit to me.  My nephew must be of the best if he is
to be in keeping with the rest of me.�

�You�ll find him a chip of good wood, sir,� said my father.

�We must make him a polished chip before we have done with him.  Your
aim, my dear nephew, must always be to be in _bon ton_.  It is not a case
of wealth, you understand.  Mere riches cannot do it.  Golden Price has
forty thousand a year, but his clothes are disastrous.  I assure you that
I saw him come down St. James�s Street the other day, and I was so
shocked at his appearance that I had to step into Vernet�s for a glass of
orange brandy.  No, it is a question of natural taste, and of following
the advice and example of those who are more experienced than yourself.�

�I fear, Charles, that Roddy�s wardrobe is country-made,� said my mother.

�We shall soon set that right when we get to town.  We shall see what
Stultz or Weston can do for him,� my uncle answered.  �We must keep him
quiet until he has some clothes to wear.�

This slight upon my best Sunday suit brought a flush to my mother�s
cheeks, which my uncle instantly observed, for he was quick in noticing
trifles.

�The clothes are very well for Friar�s Oak, sister Mary,� said he.  �And
yet you can understand that they might seem _rococo_ in the Mall.  If you
leave him in my hands I shall see to the matter.�

�On how much, sir,� asked my father, �can a young man dress in town?�

�With prudence and reasonable care, a young man of fashion can dress upon
eight hundred a year,� my uncle answered.

I saw my poor father�s face grow longer.

�I fear, sir, that Roddy must keep his country clothes,� said he.  �Even
with my prize-money��

�Tut, sir!� cried my uncle.  �I already owe Weston something over a
thousand, so how can a few odd hundreds affect it?  If my nephew comes
with me, my nephew is my care.  The point is settled, and I must refuse
to argue upon it.�  He waved his white hands as if to brush aside all
opposition.

My parents tried to thank him, but he cut them short.

�By the way, now that I am in Friar�s Oak, there is another small piece
of business which I have to perform,� said he.  �I believe that there is
a fighting-man named Harrison here, who at one time might have held the
championship.  In those days poor Avon and I were his principal backers.
I should like to have a word with him.�

You may think how proud I was to walk down the village street with my
magnificent relative, and to note out of the corner of my eye how the
folk came to the doors and windows to see us pass.  Champion Harrison was
standing outside the smithy, and he pulled his cap off when he saw my
uncle.

�God bless me, sir!  Who�d ha� thought of seein� you at Friar�s Oak?  Why,
Sir Charles, it brings old memories back to look at your face again.�

�Glad to see you looking so fit, Harrison,� said my uncle, running his
eyes over him.  �Why, with a week�s training you would be as good a man
as ever.  I don�t suppose you scale more than thirteen and a half?�

�Thirteen ten, Sir Charles.  I�m in my fortieth year, but I am sound in
wind and limb, and if my old woman would have let me off my promise, I�d
ha� had a try with some of these young ones before now.  I hear that
they�ve got some amazin� good stuff up from Bristol of late.�

�Yes, the Bristol yellowman has been the winning colour of late.  How
d�ye do, Mrs. Harrison?  I don�t suppose you remember me?�

She had come out from the house, and I noticed that her worn face�on
which some past terror seemed to have left its shadow�hardened into stern
lines as she looked at my uncle.

�I remember you too well, Sir Charles Tregellis,� said she.  �I trust
that you have not come here to-day to try to draw my husband back into
the ways that he has forsaken.�

�That�s the way with her, Sir Charles,� said Harrison, resting his great
hand upon the woman�s shoulder.  �She�s got my promise, and she holds me
to it!  There was never a better or more hard-working wife, but she ain�t
what you�d call a patron of sport, and that�s a fact.�

�Sport!� cried the woman, bitterly.  �A fine sport for you, Sir Charles,
with your pleasant twenty-mile drive into the country and your
luncheon-basket and your wines, and so merrily back to London in the cool
of the evening, with a well-fought battle to talk over.  Think of the
sport that it was to me to sit through the long hours, listening for the
wheels of the chaise which would bring my man back to me.  Sometimes he
could walk in, and sometimes he was led in, and sometimes he was carried
in, and it was only by his clothes that I could know him��

�Come, wifie,� said Harrison, patting her on the shoulder.  �I�ve been
cut up in my time, but never as bad as that.�

�And then to live for weeks afterwards with the fear that every knock at
the door may be to tell us that the other is dead, and that my man may
have to stand in the dock and take his trial for murder.�

�No, she hasn�t got a sportin� drop in her veins,� said Harrison.  �She�d
never make a patron, never!  It�s Black Baruk�s business that did it,
when we thought he�d napped it once too often.  Well, she has my promise,
and I�ll never sling my hat over the ropes unless she gives me leave.�

�You�ll keep your hat on your head like an honest, God-fearing man,
John,� said his wife, turning back into the house.

�I wouldn�t for the world say anything to make you change your
resolutions,� said my uncle.  �At the same time, if you had wished to
take a turn at the old sport, I had a good thing to put in your way.�

�Well, it�s no use, sir,� said Harrison, �but I�d be glad to hear about
it all the same.�

�They have a very good bit of stuff at thirteen stone down Gloucester
way.  Wilson is his name, and they call him Crab on account of his
style.�

Harrison shook his head.  �Never heard of him, sir.�

�Very likely not, for he has never shown in the P.R.  But they think
great things of him in the West, and he can hold his own with either of
the Belchers with the mufflers.�

�Sparrin� ain�t fightin�,� said the smith.

�I am told that he had the best of it in a by-battle with Noah James, of
Cheshire.�

�There�s no gamer man on the list, sir, than Noah James, the guardsman,�
said Harrison.  �I saw him myself fight fifty rounds after his jaw had
been cracked in three places.  If Wilson could beat him, Wilson will go
far.�

�So they think in the West, and they mean to spring him on the London
talent.  Sir Lothian Hume is his patron, and to make a long story short,
he lays me odds that I won�t find a young one of his weight to meet him.
I told him that I had not heard of any good young ones, but that I had an
old one who had not put his foot into a ring for many years, who would
make his man wish he had never come to London.

��Young or old, under twenty or over thirty-five, you may bring whom you
will at the weight, and I shall lay two to one on Wilson,� said he.  I
took him in thousands, and here I am.�

�It won�t do, Sir Charles,� said the smith, shaking his head.  �There�s
nothing would please me better, but you heard for yourself.�

�Well, if you won�t fight, Harrison, I must try to get some promising
colt.  I�d be glad of your advice in the matter.  By the way, I take the
chair at a supper of the Fancy at the Waggon and Horses in St. Martin�s
Lane next Friday.  I should be very glad if you will make one of my
guests.  Halloa, who�s this?�  Up flew his glass to his eye.

Boy Jim had come out from the forge with his hammer in his hand.  He had,
I remember, a grey flannel shirt, which was open at the neck and turned
up at the sleeves.  My uncle ran his eyes over the fine lines of his
magnificent figure with the glance of a connoisseur.

�That�s my nephew, Sir Charles.�

�Is he living with you?�

�His parents are dead.�

�Has he ever been in London?�

�No, Sir Charles.  He�s been with me here since he was as high as that
hammer.�

My uncle turned to Boy Jim.

�I hear that you have never been in London,� said he.  �Your uncle is
coming up to a supper which I am giving to the Fancy next Friday.  Would
you care to make one of us?�

Boy Jim�s dark eyes sparkled with pleasure.

�I should be glad to come, sir.�

�No, no, Jim,� cried the smith, abruptly.  �I�m sorry to gainsay you,
lad, but there are reasons why I had rather you stayed down here with
your aunt.�

�Tut, Harrison, let the lad come!� cried my uncle.

�No, no, Sir Charles.  It�s dangerous company for a lad of his mettle.
There�s plenty for him to do when I�m away.�

Poor Jim turned away with a clouded brow and strode into the smithy
again.  For my part, I slipped after him to try to console him, and to
tell him all the wonderful changes which had come so suddenly into my
life.  But I had not got half through my story, and Jim, like the good
fellow that he was, had just begun to forget his own troubles in his
delight at my good fortune, when my uncle called to me from without.  The
curricle with its tandem mares was waiting for us outside the cottage,
and Ambrose had placed the refection-basket, the lap-dog, and the
precious toilet-box inside of it.  He had himself climbed up behind, and
I, after a hearty handshake from my father, and a last sobbing embrace
from my mother, took my place beside my uncle in the front.

�Let go her head!� cried he to the ostler, and with a snap, a crack, and
a jingle, away we went upon our journey.

Across all the years how clearly I can see that spring day, with the
green English fields, the windy English sky, and the yellow,
beetle-browed cottage in which I had grown from a child to a man.  I see,
too, the figures at the garden gate: my mother, with her face turned away
and her handkerchief waving; my father, with his blue coat and his white
shorts, leaning upon his stick with his hand shading his eyes as he
peered after us.  All the village was out to see young Roddy Stone go off
with his grand relative from London to call upon the Prince in his own
palace.  The Harrisons were waving to me from the smithy, and John
Cummings from the steps of the inn, and I saw Joshua Allen, my old
schoolmaster, pointing me out to the people, as if he were showing what
came from his teaching.  To make it complete, who should drive past just
as we cleared the village but Miss Hinton, the play-actress, the pony and
phaeton the same as when first I saw her, but she herself another woman;
and I thought to myself that if Boy Jim had done nothing but that one
thing, he need not think that his youth had been wasted in the country.
She was driving to see him, I have no doubt, for they were closer than
ever, and she never looked up nor saw the hand that I waved to her.  So
as we took the curve of the road the little village vanished, and there
in the dip of the Downs, past the spires of Patcham and of Preston, lay
the broad blue sea and the grey houses of Brighton, with the strange
Eastern domes and minarets of the Prince�s Pavilion shooting out from the
centre of it.

To every traveller it was a sight of beauty, but to me it was the
world�the great wide free world�and my heart thrilled and fluttered as
the young bird�s may when it first hears the whirr of its own flight, and
skims along with the blue heaven above it and the green fields beneath.
The day may come when it may look back regretfully to the snug nest in
the thornbush, but what does it reck of that when spring is in the air
and youth in its blood, and the old hawk of trouble has not yet darkened
the sunshine with the ill-boding shadow of its wings?




CHAPTER VII.
THE HOPE OF ENGLAND.


MY uncle drove for some time in silence, but I was conscious that his eye
was always coming round to me, and I had an uneasy conviction that he was
already beginning to ask himself whether he could make anything of me, or
whether he had been betrayed into an indiscretion when he had allowed his
sister to persuade him to show her son something of the grand world in
which he lived.

�You sing, don�t you, nephew?� he asked, suddenly.

�Yes, sir, a little.�

�A baritone, I should fancy?�

�Yes, sir.�

�And your mother tells me that you play the fiddle.  These things will be
of service to you with the Prince.  Music runs in his family.  Your
education has been what you could get at a village school.  Well, you are
not examined in Greek roots in polite society, which is lucky for some of
us.  It is as well just to have a tag or two of Horace or Virgil: �sub
tegmine fagi,� or �habet f�num in cornu,� which gives a flavour to one�s
conversation like the touch of garlic in a salad.  It is not _bon ton_ to
be learned, but it is a graceful thing to indicate that you have
forgotten a good deal.  Can you write verse?�

�I fear not, sir.�

�A small book of rhymes may be had for half a crown.  Vers de Soci�t� are
a great assistance to a young man.  If you have the ladies on your side,
it does not matter whom you have against you.  You must learn to open a
door, to enter a room, to present a snuff-box, raising the lid with the
forefinger of the hand in which you hold it.  You must acquire the bow
for a man, with its necessary touch of dignity, and that for a lady,
which cannot be too humble, and should still contain the least suspicion
of abandon.  You must cultivate a manner with women which shall be
deprecating and yet audacious.  Have you any eccentricity?�

It made me laugh, the easy way in which he asked the question, as if it
were a most natural thing to possess.

�You have a pleasant, catching laugh, at all events,� said he.  �But an
eccentricity is very _bon ton_ at present, and if you feel any leaning
towards one, I should certainly advise you to let it run its course.
Petersham would have remained a mere peer all his life had it not come
out that he had a snuff-box for every day in the year, and that he had
caught cold through a mistake of his valet, who sent him out on a bitter
winter day with a thin S�vres china box instead of a thick tortoiseshell.
That brought him out of the ruck, you see, and people remember him.  Even
some small characteristic, such as having an apricot tart on your
sideboard all the year round, or putting your candle out at night by
stuffing it under your pillow, serves to separate you from your
neighbour.  In my own case, it is my precise judgment upon matter of
dress and decorum which has placed me where I am.  I do not profess to
follow a law.  I set one.  For example, I am taking you to-day to see the
Prince in a nankeen vest.  What do you think will be the consequence of
that?�

My fears told me that it might be my own very great discomfiture, but I
did not say so.

�Why, the night coach will carry the news to London.  It will be in
Brookes�s and White�s to-morrow morning.  Within, a week St. James�s
Street and the Mall will be full of nankeen waistcoats.  A most painful
incident happened to me once.  My cravat came undone in the street, and I
actually walked from Carlton House to Watier�s in Bruton Street with the
two ends hanging loose.  Do you suppose it shook my position?  The same
evening there were dozens of young bloods walking the streets of London
with their cravats loose.  If I had not rearranged mine there would not
be one tied in the whole kingdom now, and a great art would have been
prematurely lost.  You have not yet began to practise it?�

I confessed that I had not.

�You should begin now in your youth.  I will myself teach you the _coup
d�archet_.  By using a few hours in each day, which would otherwise be
wasted, you may hope to have excellent cravats in middle life.  The whole
knack lies in pointing your chin to the sky, and then arranging your
folds by the gradual descent of your lower jaw.�

When my uncle spoke like this there was always that dancing, mischievous
light in his dark blue eyes, which showed me that this humour of his was
a conscious eccentricity, depending, as I believe, upon a natural
fastidiousness of taste, but wilfully driven to grotesque lengths for the
very reason which made him recommend me also to develop some peculiarity
of my own.  When I thought of the way in which he had spoken of his
unhappy friend, Lord Avon, upon the evening before, and of the emotion
which he showed as he told the horrible story, I was glad to think that
there was the heart of a man there, however much it might please him to
conceal it.

And, as it happened, I was very soon to have another peep at it, for a
most unexpected event befell us as we drew up in front of the Crown
hotel.  A swarm of ostlers and grooms had rushed out to us, and my uncle,
throwing down the reins, gathered Fidelio on his cushion from under the
seat.

�Ambrose,� he cried, �you may take Fidelio.�

But there came no answer.  The seat behind was unoccupied.  Ambrose was
gone.

We could hardly believe our eyes when we alighted and found that it was
really so.  He had most certainly taken his seat there at Friar�s Oak,
and from there on we had come without a break as fast as the mares could
travel.  Whither, then, could he have vanished to?

�He�s fallen off in a fit!� cried my uncle.  �I�d drive back, but the
Prince is expecting us.  Where�s the landlord?  Here, Coppinger, send
your best man back to Friar�s Oak as fast as his horse can go, to find
news of my valet, Ambrose.  See that no pains be spared.  Now, nephew, we
shall lunch, and then go up to the Pavilion.�

My uncle was much disturbed by the strange loss of his valet, the more so
as it was his custom to go through a whole series of washings and
changings after even the shortest journey.  For my own part, mindful of
my mother�s advice, I carefully brushed the dust from my clothes and made
myself as neat as possible.  My heart was down in the soles of my little
silver-buckled shoes now that I had the immediate prospect of meeting so
great and terrible a person as the Prince of Wales.  I had seen his
flaring yellow barouche flying through Friar�s Oak many a time, and had
halloaed and waved my hat with the others as it passed, but never in my
wildest dreams had it entered my head that I should ever be called upon
to look him in the face and answer his questions.  My mother had taught
me to regard him with reverence, as one of those whom God had placed to
rule over us; but my uncle smiled when I told him of her teaching.

�You are old enough to see things as they are, nephew,� said he, �and
your knowledge of them is the badge that you are in that inner circle
where I mean to place you.  There is no one who knows the Prince better
than I do, and there is no one who trusts him less.  A stranger
contradiction of qualities was never gathered under one hat.  He is a man
who is always in a hurry, and yet has never anything to do.  He fusses
about things with which he has no concern, and he neglects every obvious
duty.  He is generous to those who have no claim upon him, but he has
ruined his tradesmen by refusing to pay his just debts.  He is
affectionate to casual acquaintances, but he dislikes his father, loathes
his mother, and is not on speaking terms with his wife.  He claims to be
the first gentleman of England, but the gentlemen of England have
responded by blackballing his friends at their clubs, and by warning him
off from Newmarket under suspicion of having tampered with a horse.  He
spends his days in uttering noble sentiments, and contradicting them by
ignoble actions.  He tells stories of his own doings which are so
grotesque that they can only be explained by the madness which runs in
his blood.  And yet, with all this, he can be courteous, dignified, and
kindly upon occasion, and I have seen an impulsive good-heartedness in
the man which has made me overlook faults which come mainly from his
being placed in a position which no one upon this earth was ever less
fitted to fill.  But this is between ourselves, nephew; and now you will
come with me and you will form an opinion for yourself.�

It was but a short walk, and yet it took us some time, for my uncle
stalked along with great dignity, his lace-bordered handkerchief in one
hand, and his cane with the clouded amber head dangling from the other.
Every one that we met seemed to know him, and their hats flew from their
heads as we passed.  He took little notice of these greetings, save to
give a nod to one, or to slightly raise his forefinger to another.  It
chanced, however, that as we turned into the Pavilion Grounds, we met a
magnificent team of four coal-black horses, driven by a rough-looking,
middle-aged fellow in an old weather-stained cape.  There was nothing
that I could see to distinguish him from any professional driver, save
that he was chatting very freely with a dainty little woman who was
perched on the box beside him.

�Halloa, Charlie!  Good drive down?� he cried.

My uncle bowed and smiled to the lady.

�Broke it at Friar�s Oak,� said he.  �I�ve my light curricle and two new
mares�half thorough-bred, half Cleveland bay.�

�What d�you think of my team of blacks?� asked the other.

�Yes, Sir Charles, what d�you think of them?  Ain�t they damnation
smart?� cried the little woman.

�Plenty of power.  Good horses for the Sussex clay.  Too thick about the
fetlocks for me.  I like to travel.�

�Travel!� cried the woman, with extraordinary vehemence.  �Why, what
the�� and she broke into such language as I had never heard from a man�s
lips before.  �We�d start with our swingle-bars touching, and we�d have
your dinner ordered, cooked, laid, and eaten before you were there to
claim it.�

�By George, yes, Letty is right!� cried the man.  �D�you start
to-morrow?�

�Yes, Jack.�

�Well, I�ll make you an offer.  Look ye here, Charlie!  I�ll spring my
cattle from the Castle Square at quarter before nine.  You can follow as
the clock strikes.  I�ve double the horses and double the weight.  If you
so much as see me before we cross Westminster Bridge, I�ll pay you a cool
hundred.  If not, it�s my money�play or pay.  Is it a match?�

�Very good,� said my uncle, and, raising his hat, he led the way into the
grounds.  As I followed, I saw the woman take the reins, while the man
looked after us, and squirted a jet of tobacco-juice from between his
teeth in coachman fashion.

�That�s Sir John Lade,� said my uncle, �one of the richest men and best
whips in England.  There isn�t a professional on the road that can handle
either his tongue or his ribbons better; but his wife, Lady Letty, is his
match with the one or the other.�

�It was dreadful to hear her,� said I.

�Oh, it�s her eccentricity.  We all have them; and she amuses the Prince.
Now, nephew, keep close at my elbow, and have your eyes open and your
mouth shut.�

Two lines of magnificent red and gold footmen who guarded the door bowed
deeply as my uncle and I passed between them, he with his head in the air
and a manner as if he entered into his own, whilst I tried to look
assured, though my heart was beating thin and fast.  Within there was a
high and large hall, ornamented with Eastern decorations, which
harmonized with the domes and minarets of the exterior.  A number of
people were moving quietly about, forming into groups and whispering to
each other.  One of these, a short, burly, red-faced man, full of fuss
and self-importance, came hurrying up to my uncle.

�I have de goot news, Sir Charles,� said he, sinking his voice as one who
speaks of weighty measures.  �_Es ist vollendet_�dat is, I have it at
last thoroughly done.�

�Well, serve it hot,� said my uncle, coldly, �and see that the sauces are
a little better than when last I dined at Carlton House.�

�Ah, mine Gott, you tink I talk of de cuisine.  It is de affair of de
Prince dat I speak of.  Dat is one little _vol-au-vent_ dat is worth one
hundred tousand pound.  Ten per cent., and double to be repaid when de
Royal pappa die.  _Alles ist fertig_.  Goldshmidt of de Hague have took
it up, and de Dutch public has subscribe de money.�

�God help the Dutch public!� muttered my uncle, as the fat little man
bustled off with his news to some new-comer.  �That�s the Prince�s famous
cook, nephew.  He has not his equal in England for a _filet saut� aux
champignons_.  He manages his master�s money affairs.�

�The cook!� I exclaimed, in bewilderment.

�You look surprised, nephew.�

�I should have thought that some respectable banking firm��

My uncle inclined his lips to my ear.

�No respectable house would touch them,� he whispered.  �Ah, Mellish, is
the Prince within?�

�In the private saloon, Sir Charles,� said the gentleman addressed.

�Any one with him?�

�Sheridan and Francis.  He said he expected you.�

�Then we shall go through.�

I followed him through the strangest succession of rooms, full of curious
barbaric splendour which impressed me as being very rich and wonderful,
though perhaps I should think differently now.  Gold and scarlet in
arabesque designs gleamed upon the walls, with gilt dragons and monsters
writhing along cornices and out of corners.  Look where I would, on panel
or ceiling, a score of mirrors flashed back the picture of the tall,
proud, white-faced man, and the youth who walked so demurely at his
elbow.  Finally, a footman opened a door, and we found ourselves in the
Prince�s own private apartment.

Two gentlemen were lounging in a very easy fashion upon luxurious
fauteuils at the further end of the room and a third stood between them,
his thick, well-formed legs somewhat apart and his hands clasped behind
him.  The sun was shining in upon them through a side-window, and I can
see the three faces now�one in the dusk, one in the light, and one cut
across by the shadow.  Of those at the sides, I recall the reddish nose
and dark, flashing eyes of the one, and the hard, austere face of the
other, with the high coat-collars and many-wreathed cravats.  These I
took in at a glance, but it was upon the man in the centre that my gaze
was fixed, for this I knew must be the Prince of Wales.

George was then in his forty-first year, and with the help of his tailor
and his hairdresser, he might have passed as somewhat less.  The sight of
him put me at my ease, for he was a merry-looking man, handsome too in a
portly, full-blooded way, with laughing eyes and pouting, sensitive lips.
His nose was turned upwards, which increased the good-humoured effect of
his countenance at the expense of its dignity.  His cheeks were pale and
sodden, like those of a man who lived too well and took too little
exercise.  He was dressed in a single-breasted black coat buttoned up, a
pair of leather pantaloons stretched tightly across his broad thighs,
polished Hessian boots, and a huge white neckcloth.

�Halloa, Tregellis!� he cried, in the cheeriest fashion, as my uncle
crossed the threshold, and then suddenly the smile faded from his face,
and his eyes gleamed with resentment.  �What the deuce is this?� he
shouted, angrily.

A thrill of fear passed through me as I thought that it was my appearance
which had produced this outburst.  But his eyes were gazing past us, and
glancing round we saw that a man in a brown coat and scratch wig had
followed so closely at our heels, that the footmen had let him pass under
the impression that he was of our party.  His face was very red, and the
folded blue paper which he carried in his hand shook and crackled in his
excitement.

�Why, it�s Vuillamy, the furniture man,� cried the Prince.  �What, am I
to be dunned in my own private room?  Where�s Mellish?  Where�s
Townshend?  What the deuce is Tom Tring doing?�

�I wouldn�t have intruded, your Royal Highness, but I must have the
money�or even a thousand on account would do.�

�Must have it, must you, Vuillamy?  That�s a fine word to use.  I pay my
debts in my own time, and I�m not to be bullied.  Turn him out, footman!
Take him away!�

�If I don�t get it by Monday, I shall be in your papa�s Bench,� wailed
the little man, and as the footman led him out we could hear him, amidst
shouts of laughter, still protesting that he would wind up in �papa�s
Bench.�

�That�s the very place for a furniture man,� said the man with the red
nose.

�It should be the longest bench in the world, Sherry,� answered the
Prince, �for a good many of his subjects will want seats on it.  Very
glad to see you back, Tregellis, but you must really be more careful what
you bring in upon your skirts.  It was only yesterday that we had an
infernal Dutchman here howling about some arrears of interest and the
deuce knows what.  �My good fellow,� said I, �as long as the Commons
starve me, I have to starve you,� and so the matter ended.�

�I think, sir, that the Commons would respond now if the matter were
fairly put before them by Charlie Fox or myself,� said Sheridan.

The Prince burst out against the Commons with an energy of hatred that
one would scarce expect from that chubby, good-humoured face.

�Why, curse them!� he cried.  �After all their preaching and throwing my
father�s model life, as they called it, in my teeth, they had to pay
_his_ debts to the tune of nearly a million, whilst I can�t get a hundred
thousand out of them.  And look at all they�ve done for my brothers!
York is Commander-in-Chief.  Clarence is Admiral.  What am I?  Colonel of
a damned dragoon regiment under the orders of my own younger brother.
It�s my mother that�s at the bottom of it all.  She always tried to hold
me back.  But what�s this you�ve brought, Tregellis, eh?�

My uncle put his hand on my sleeve and led me forward.

�This is my sister�s son, sir; Rodney Stone by name,� said he.  �He is
coming with me to London, and I thought it right to begin by presenting
him to your Royal Highness.�

�Quite right!  Quite right!� said the Prince, with a good-natured smile,
patting me in a friendly way upon the shoulder.  �Is your mother living?�

�Yes, sir,� said I.

�If you are a good son to her you will never go wrong.  And, mark my
words, Mr. Rodney Stone, you should honour the King, love your country,
and uphold the glorious British Constitution.�

When I thought of the energy with which he had just been cursing the
House of Commons, I could scarce keep from smiling, and I saw Sheridan
put his hand up to his lips.

�You have only to do this, to show a regard for your word, and to keep
out of debt in order to insure a happy and respected life.  What is your
father, Mr. Stone?  Royal Navy!  Well, it is a glorious service.  I have
had a touch of it myself.  Did I ever tell you how we laid aboard the
French sloop of war _Minerve_�hey, Tregellis?�

�No, sir,� said my uncle.  Sheridan and Francis exchanged glances behind
the Prince�s back.

�She was flying her tricolour out there within sight of my pavilion
windows.  Never saw such monstrous impudence in my life!  It would take a
man of less mettle than me to stand it.  Out I went in my little
cock-boat�you know my sixty-ton yawl, Charlie?�with two four-pounders on
each side, and a six-pounder in the bows.�

�Well, sir!  Well, sir!  And what then, sir?� cried Francis, who appeared
to be an irascible, rough-tongued man.

�You will permit me to tell the story in my own way, Sir Philip,� said
the Prince, with dignity.  �I was about to say that our metal was so
light that I give you my word, gentlemen, that I carried my port
broadside in one coat pocket, and my starboard in the other.  Up we came
to the big Frenchman, took her fire, and scraped the paint off her before
we let drive.  But it was no use.  By George, gentlemen, our balls just
stuck in her timbers like stones in a mud wall.  She had her nettings up,
but we scrambled aboard, and at it we went hammer and anvil.  It was a
sharp twenty minutes, but we beat her people down below, made the hatches
fast on them, and towed her into Seaham.  Surely you were with us,
Sherry?�

�I was in London at the time,� said Sheridan, gravely.

�You can vouch for it, Francis!�

�I can vouch to having heard your Highness tell the story.�

�It was a rough little bit of cutlass and pistol work.  But, for my own
part, I like the rapier.  It�s a gentleman�s weapon.  You heard of my
bout with the Chevalier d�Eon?  I had him at my sword-point for forty
minutes at Angelo�s.  He was one of the best blades in Europe, but I was
a little too supple in the wrist for him.  �I thank God there was a
button on your Highness�s foil,� said he, when we had finished our
breather.  By the way, you�re a bit of a duellist yourself, Tregellis.
How often have you been out?�

�I used to go when I needed exercise,� said my uncle, carelessly.  �But I
have taken to tennis now instead.  A painful incident happened the last
time that I was out, and it sickened me of it.�

�You killed your man�?�

�No, no, sir, it was worse than that.  I had a coat that Weston has never
equalled.  To say that it fitted me is not to express it.  It _was_
me�like the hide on a horse.  I�ve had sixty from him since, but he could
never approach it.  The sit of the collar brought tears into my eyes,
sir, when first I saw it; and as to the waist��

�But the duel, Tregellis!� cried the Prince.

�Well, sir, I wore it at the duel, like the thoughtless fool that I was.
It was Major Hunter, of the Guards, with whom I had had a little
_tracasserie_, because I hinted that he should not come into Brookes�s
smelling of the stables.  I fired first, and missed.  He fired, and I
shrieked in despair.  �He�s hit!  A surgeon!  A surgeon!� they cried.  �A
tailor!  A tailor!� said I, for there was a double hole through the tails
of my masterpiece.  No, it was past all repair.  You may laugh, sir, but
I�ll never see the like of it again.�

I had seated myself on a settee in the corner, upon the Prince�s
invitation, and very glad I was to remain quiet and unnoticed, listening
to the talk of these men.  It was all in the same extravagant vein,
garnished with many senseless oaths; but I observed this difference,
that, whereas my uncle and Sheridan had something of humour in their
exaggeration, Francis tended always to ill-nature, and the Prince to
self-glorification.  Finally, the conversation turned to music�I am not
sure that my uncle did not artfully bring it there, and the Prince,
hearing from him of my tastes, would have it that I should then and there
sit down at the wonderful little piano, all inlaid with mother-of-pearl,
which stood in the corner, and play him the accompaniment to his song.
It was called, as I remember, �The Briton Conquers but to Save,� and he
rolled it out in a very fair bass voice, the others joining in the
chorus, and clapping vigorously when he finished.

�Bravo, Mr. Stone!� said he.  �You have an excellent touch; and I know
what I am talking about when I speak of music.  Cramer, of the Opera,
said only the other day that he had rather hand his b�ton to me than to
any amateur in England.  Halloa, it�s Charlie Fox, by all that�s
wonderful!�

He had run forward with much warmth, and was shaking the hand of a
singular-looking person who had just entered the room.  The new-comer was
a stout, square-built man, plainly and almost carelessly dressed, with an
uncouth manner and a rolling gait.  His age might have been something
over fifty, and his swarthy, harshly-featured face was already deeply
lined either by his years or by his excesses.  I have never seen a
countenance in which the angel and the devil were more obviously wedded.
Above, was the high, broad forehead of the philosopher, with keen,
humorous eyes looking out from under thick, strong brows.  Below, was the
heavy jowl of the sensualist curving in a broad crease over his cravat.
That brow was the brow of the public Charles Fox, the thinker, the
philanthropist, the man who rallied and led the Liberal party during the
twenty most hazardous years of its existence.  That jaw was the jaw of
the private Charles Fox, the gambler, the libertine, the drunkard.  Yet
to his sins he never added the crowning one of hypocrisy.  His vices were
as open as his virtues.  In some quaint freak of Nature, two spirits
seemed to have been joined in one body, and the same frame to contain the
best and the worst man of his age.

�I�ve run down from Chertsey, sir, just to shake you by the hand, and to
make sure that the Tories have not carried you off.�

�Hang it, Charlie, you know that I sink or swim with my friends!  A Whig
I started, and a Whig I shall remain.�

I thought that I could read upon Fox�s dark face that he was by no means
so confident about the Prince�s principles.

�Pitt has been at you, sir, I understand?�

�Yes, confound him!  I hate the sight of that sharp-pointed snout of his,
which he wants to be ever poking into my affairs.  He and Addington have
been boggling about the debts again.  Why, look ye, Charlie, if Pitt held
me in contempt he could not behave different.�

I gathered from the smile which flitted over Sheridan�s expressive face
that this was exactly what Pitt did do.  But straightway they all plunged
into politics, varied by the drinking of sweet maraschino, which a
footman brought round upon a salver.  The King, the Queen, the Lords, and
the Commons were each in succession cursed by the Prince, in spite of the
excellent advice which he had given me about the British Constitution.

�Why, they allow me so little that I can�t look after my own people.
There are a dozen annuities to old servants and the like, and it�s all I
can do to scrape the money together to pay them.  However, my��he pulled
himself up and coughed in a consequential way��my financial agent has
arranged for a loan, repayable upon the King�s death.  This liqueur isn�t
good for either of us, Charlie.  We�re both getting monstrous stout.�

�I can�t get any exercise for the gout,� said Fox.

�I am blooded fifty ounces a month, but the more I take the more I make.
You wouldn�t think, to look at us, Tregellis, that we could do what we
have done.  We�ve had some days and nights together, Charlie!�

Fox smiled and shook his head.

�You remember how we posted to Newmarket before the races.  We took a
public coach, Tregellis, clapped the postillions into the rumble, and
jumped on to their places.  Charlie rode the leader and I the wheeler.
One fellow wouldn�t let us through his turnpike, and Charlie hopped off
and had his coat off in a minute.  The fellow thought he had to do with a
fighting man, and soon cleared the way for us.�

�By the way, sir, speaking of fighting men, I give a supper to the Fancy
at the Waggon and Horses on Friday next,� said my uncle.  �If you should
chance to be in town, they would think it a great honour if you should
condescend to look in upon us.�

�I�ve not seen a fight since I saw Tom Tyne, the tailor, kill Earl
fourteen years ago.  I swore off then, and you know me as a man of my
word, Tregellis.  Of course, I�ve been at the ringside _incog._ many a
time, but never as the Prince of Wales.�

�We should be vastly honoured if you would come _incog._ to our supper,
sir.�

�Well, well, Sherry, make a note of it.  We�ll be at Carlton House on
Friday.  The Prince can�t come, you know, Tregellis, but you might
reserve a chair for the Earl of Chester.�

�Sir, we shall be proud to see the Earl of Chester there,� said my uncle.

�By the way, Tregellis,� said Fox, �there�s some rumour about your having
a sporting bet with Sir Lothian Hume.  What�s the truth of it?�

�Only a small matter of a couple of thous to a thou, he giving the odds.
He has a fancy to this new Gloucester man, Crab Wilson, and I�m to find a
man to beat him.  Anything under twenty or over thirty-five, at or about
thirteen stone.�

�You take Charlie Fox�s advice, then,� cried the Prince.  �When it comes
to handicapping a horse, playing a hand, matching a cock, or picking a
man, he has the best judgment in England.  Now, Charlie, whom have we
upon the list who can beat Crab Wilson, of Gloucester?�

I was amazed at the interest and knowledge which all these great people
showed about the ring, for they not only had the deeds of the principal
men of the time�Belcher, Mendoza, Jackson, or Dutch Sam�at their fingers�
ends, but there was no fighting man so obscure that they did not know the
details of his deeds and prospects.  The old ones and then the young were
discussed�their weight, their gameness, their hitting power, and their
constitution.  Who, as he saw Sheridan and Fox eagerly arguing as to
whether Caleb Baldwin, the Westminster costermonger, could hold his own
with Isaac Bittoon, the Jew, would have guessed that the one was the
deepest political philosopher in Europe, and that the other would be
remembered as the author of the wittiest comedy and of the finest speech
of his generation?

The name of Champion Harrison came very early into the discussion, and
Fox, who had a high idea of Crab Wilson�s powers, was of opinion that my
uncle�s only chance lay in the veteran taking the field again.  �He may
be slow on his pins, but he fights with his head, and he hits like the
kick of a horse.  When he finished Black Baruk the man flew across the
outer ring as well as the inner, and fell among the spectators.  If he
isn�t absolutely stale, Tregellis, he is your best chance.�

My uncle shrugged his shoulders.

�If poor Avon were here we might do something with him, for he was
Harrison�s first patron, and the man was devoted to him.  But his wife is
too strong for me.  And now, sir, I must leave you, for I have had the
misfortune to-day to lose the best valet in England, and I must make
inquiry for him.  I thank your Royal Highness for your kindness in
receiving my nephew in so gracious a fashion.�

�Till Friday, then,� said the Prince, holding out his hand.  �I have to
go up to town in any case, for there is a poor devil of an East India
Company�s officer who has written to me in his distress.  If I can raise
a few hundreds, I shall see him and set things right for him.  Now, Mr.
Stone, you have your life before you, and I hope it will be one which
your uncle may be proud of.  You will honour the King, and show respect
for the Constitution, Mr. Stone.  And, hark ye, you will avoid debt, and
bear in mind that your honour is a sacred thing.�

So I carried away a last impression of his sensual, good-humoured face,
his high cravat, and his broad leather thighs.  Again we passed the
strange rooms, the gilded monsters, and the gorgeous footmen, and it was
with relief that I found myself out in the open air once more, with the
broad blue sea in front of us, and the fresh evening breeze upon our
faces.




CHAPTER VIII.
THE BRIGHTON ROAD.


MY uncle and I were up betimes next morning, but he was much out of
temper, for no news had been heard of his valet Ambrose.  He had indeed
become like one of those ants of which I have read, who are so accustomed
to be fed by smaller ants that when they are left to themselves they die
of hunger.  It was only by the aid of a man whom the landlord procured,
and of Fox�s valet, who had been sent expressly across, that his toilet
was at last performed.

�I must win this race, nephew,� said he, when he had finished breakfast;
�I can�t afford to be beat.  Look out of the window and see if the Lades
are there.�

�I see a red four-in-hand in the square, and there is a crowd round it.
Yes, I see the lady upon the box seat.�

�Is our tandem out?�

�It is at the door.�

�Come, then, and you shall have such a drive as you never had before.�

He stood at the door pulling on his long brown driving-gauntlets and
giving his orders to the ostlers.

�Every ounce will tell,� said he.  �We�ll leave that dinner-basket
behind.  And you can keep my dog for me, Coppinger.  You know him and
understand him.  Let him have his warm milk and cura�oa the same as
usual.  Whoa, my darlings, you�ll have your fill of it before you reach
Westminster Bridge.�

�Shall I put in the toilet-case?� asked the landlord.  I saw the struggle
upon my uncle�s face, but he was true to his principles.

�Put it under the seat�the front seat,� said he.  �Nephew, you must keep
your weight as far forward as possible.  Can you do anything on a yard of
tin?  Well, if you can�t, we�ll leave the trumpet.  Buckle that girth up,
Thomas.  Have you greased the hubs, as I told you?  Well, jump up,
nephew, and we�ll see them off.�

Quite a crowd had gathered in the Old Square: men and women, dark-coated
tradesmen, bucks from the Prince�s Court, and officers from Hove, all in
a buzz of excitement; for Sir John Lade and my uncle were two of the most
famous whips of the time, and a match between them was a thing to talk of
for many a long day.

�The Prince will be sorry to have missed the start,� said my uncle.  �He
doesn�t show before midday.  Ah, Jack, good morning!  Your servant,
madam!  It�s a fine day for a little bit of waggoning.�

As our tandem came alongside of the four-in-hand, with the two bonny bay
mares gleaming like shot-silk in the sunshine, a murmur of admiration
rose from the crowd.  My uncle, in his fawn-coloured driving-coat, with
all his harness of the same tint, looked the ideal of a Corinthian whip;
while Sir John Lade, with his many-caped coat, his white hat, and his
rough, weather-beaten face, might have taken his seat with a line of
professionals upon any ale-house bench without any one being able to pick
him out as one of the wealthiest landowners in England.  It was an age of
eccentricity, but he had carried his peculiarities to a length which
surprised even the out-and-outers by marrying the sweetheart of a famous
highwayman when the gallows had come between her and her lover.  She was
perched by his side, looking very smart in a flowered bonnet and grey
travelling-dress, while in front of them the four splendid coal-black
horses, with a flickering touch of gold upon their powerful, well-curved
quarters, were pawing the dust in their eagerness to be off.

�It�s a hundred that you don�t see us before Westminster with a quarter
of an hour�s start,� said Sir John.

�I�ll take you another hundred that we pass you,� answered my uncle.

�Very good.  Time�s up.  Good-bye!�  He gave a _tchk_ of the tongue,
shook his reins, saluted with his whip; in true coachman�s style, and
away he went, taking the curve out of the square in a workmanlike fashion
that fetched a cheer from the crowd.  We heard the dwindling roar of the
wheels upon the cobblestones until they died away in the distance.

It seemed one of the longest quarters of an hour that I had ever known
before the first stroke of nine boomed from the parish clock.  For my
part, I was fidgeting in my seat in my impatience, but my uncle�s calm,
pale face and large blue eyes were as tranquil and demure as those of the
most unconcerned spectator.  He was keenly on the alert, however, and it
seemed to me that the stroke of the clock and the thong of his whip fell
together�not in a blow, but in a sharp snap over the leader, which sent
us flying with a jingle and a rattle upon our fifty miles� journey.  I
heard a roar from behind us, saw the gliding lines of windows with
staring faces and waving handkerchiefs, and then we were off the stones
and on to the good white road which curved away in front of us, with the
sweep of the green downs upon either side.

I had been provided with shillings that the turnpike-gate might not stop
us, but my uncle reined in the mares and took them at a very easy trot up
all the heavy stretch which ends in Clayton Hill.  He let them go then,
and we flashed through Friar�s Oak and across St. John�s Common without
more than catching a glimpse of the yellow cottage which contained all
that I loved best.  Never have I travelled at such a pace, and never have
I felt such a sense of exhilaration from the rush of keen upland air upon
our faces, and from the sight of those two glorious creatures stretched
to their utmost, with the roar of their hoofs and the rattle of our
wheels as the light curricle bounded and swayed behind them.

�It�s a long four miles uphill from here to Hand Cross,� said my uncle,
as we flew through Cuckfield.  �I must ease them a bit, for I cannot
afford to break the hearts of my cattle.  They have the right blood in
them, and they would gallop until they dropped if I were brute enough to
let them.  Stand up on the seat, nephew, and see if you can get a glimpse
of them.�

I stood up, steadying myself upon my uncle�s shoulder, but though I could
see for a mile, or perhaps a quarter more, there was not a sign of the
four-in-hand.

�If he has sprung his cattle up all these hills they�ll be spent ere they
see Croydon,� said he.

�They have four to two,� said I.

�_J�en suis bien s�r_.  Sir John�s black strain makes a good, honest
creature, but not fliers like these.  There lies Cuckfield Place, where
the towers are, yonder.  Get your weight right forward on the splashboard
now that we are going uphill, nephew.  Look at the action of that leader:
did ever you see anything more easy and more beautiful?�

We were taking the hill at a quiet trot, but even so, we made the
carrier, walking in the shadow of his huge, broad-wheeled, canvas-covered
waggon, stare at us in amazement.  Close to Hand Cross we passed the
Royal Brighton stage, which had left at half-past seven, dragging heavily
up the slope, and its passengers, toiling along through the dust behind,
gave us a cheer as we whirled by.  At Hand Cross we caught a glimpse of
the old landlord, hurrying out with his gin and his gingerbread; but the
dip of the ground was downwards now, and away we flew as fast as eight
gallant hoofs could take us.

�Do you drive, nephew?�

�Very little, sir.�

�There is no driving on the Brighton Road.�

�How is that, sir?�

�Too good a road, nephew.  I have only to give them their heads, and they
will race me into Westminster.  It wasn�t always so.  When I was a very
young man one might learn to handle his twenty yards of tape here as well
as elsewhere.  There�s not much really good waggoning now south of
Leicestershire.  Show me a man who can hit �em and hold �em on a
Yorkshire dale-side, and that�s the man who comes from the right school.�

We had raced over Crawley Down and into the broad main street of Crawley
village, flying between two country waggons in a way which showed me that
even now a driver might do something on the road.  With every turn I
peered ahead, looking for our opponents, but my uncle seemed to concern
himself very little about them, and occupied himself in giving me advice,
mixed up with so many phrases of the craft, that it was all that I could
do to follow him.

�Keep a finger for each, or you will have your reins clubbed,� said he.
�As to the whip, the less fanning the better if you have willing cattle;
but when you want to put a little life into a coach, see that you get
your thong on to the one that needs it, and don�t let it fly round after
you�ve hit.  I�ve seen a driver warm up the off-side passenger on the
roof behind him every time he tried to cut his off-side wheeler.  I
believe that is their dust over yonder.�

A long stretch of road lay before us, barred with the shadows of wayside
trees.  Through the green fields a lazy blue river was drawing itself
slowly along, passing under a bridge in front of us.  Beyond was a young
fir plantation, and over its olive line there rose a white whirl which
drifted swiftly, like a cloud-scud on a breezy day.

�Yes, yes, it�s they!� cried my uncle.  �No one else would travel as
fast.  Come, nephew, we�re half-way when we cross the mole at Kimberham
Bridge, and we�ve done it in two hours and fourteen minutes.  The Prince
drove to Carlton House with a three tandem in four hours and a half.  The
first half is the worst half, and we might cut his time if all goes well.
We should make up between this and Reigate.�

And we flew.  The bay mares seemed to know what that white puff in front
of us signified, and they stretched themselves like greyhounds.  We
passed a phaeton and pair London-bound, and we left it behind as if it
had been standing still.  Trees, gates, cottages went dancing by.  We
heard the folks shouting from the fields, under the impression that we
were a runaway.  Faster and faster yet they raced, the hoofs rattling
like castanets, the yellow manes flying, the wheels buzzing, and every
joint and rivet creaking and groaning, while the curricle swung and
swayed until I found myself clutching to the side-rail.  My uncle eased
them and glanced at his watch as we saw the grey tiles and dingy red
houses of Reigate in the hollow beneath us.

�We did the last six well under twenty minutes,� said he.  �We�ve time in
hand now, and a little water at the Red Lion will do them no harm.  Red
four-in-hand passed, ostler?�

�Just gone, sir.�

�Going hard?�

�Galloping full split, sir!  Took the wheel off a butcher�s cart at the
corner of the High Street, and was out o� sight before the butcher�s boy
could see what had hurt him.�

_Z-z-z-z-ack_! went the long thong, and away we flew once more.  It was
market day at Redhill, and the road was crowded with carts of produce,
droves of bullocks, and farmers� gigs.  It was a sight to see how my
uncle threaded his way amongst them all.  Through the market-place we
dashed amidst the shouting of men, the screaming of women, and the
scuttling of poultry, and then we were out in the country again, with the
long, steep incline of the Redhill Road before us.  My uncle waved his
whip in the air with a shrill view-halloa.

There was the dust-cloud rolling up the hill in front of us, and through
it we had a shadowy peep of the backs of our opponents, with a flash of
brass-work and a gleam of scarlet.

�There�s half the game won, nephew.  Now we must pass them.  Hark
forrard, my beauties!  By George, if Kitty isn�t foundered!�

The leader had suddenly gone dead lame.  In an instant we were both out
of the curricle and on our knees beside her.  It was but a stone, wedged
between frog and shoe in the off fore-foot, but it was a minute or two
before we could wrench it out.  When we had regained our places the Lades
were round the curve of the hill and out of sight.

�Bad luck!� growled my uncle.  �But they can�t get away from us!�  For
the first time he touched the mares up, for he had but cracked the whip
over their heads before.  �If we catch them in the next few miles we can
spare them for the rest of the way.�

They were beginning to show signs of exhaustion.  Their breath came quick
and hoarse, and their beautiful coats were matted with moisture.  At the
top of the hill, however, they settled down into their swing once more.

�Where on earth have they got to?� cried my uncle.  �Can you make them
out on the road, nephew?�

We could see a long white ribbon of it, all dotted with carts and waggons
coming from Croydon to Redhill, but there was no sign of the big red
four-in-hand.

�There they are!  Stole away!  Stole away!� he cried, wheeling the mares
round into a side road which struck to the right out of that which we had
travelled.  �There they are, nephew!  On the brow of the hill!�

Sure enough, on the rise of a curve upon our right the four-in-hand had
appeared, the horses stretched to the utmost.  Our mares laid themselves
out gallantly, and the distance between us began slowly to decrease.  I
found that I could see the black band upon Sir John�s white hat, then
that I could count the folds of his cape; finally, that I could see the
pretty features of his wife as she looked back at us.

�We�re on the side road to Godstone and Warlingham,� said my uncle.  �I
suppose he thought that he could make better time by getting out of the
way of the market carts.  But we�ve got the deuce of a hill to come down.
You�ll see some fun, nephew, or I am mistaken.�

As he spoke I suddenly saw the wheels of the four-in-hand disappear, then
the body of it, and then the two figures upon the box, as suddenly and
abruptly as if it had bumped down the first three steps of some gigantic
stairs.  An instant later we had reached the same spot, and there was the
road beneath us, steep and narrow, winding in long curves into the
valley.  The four-in-hand was swishing down it as hard as the horses
could gallop.

�Thought so!� cried my uncle.  �If he doesn�t brake, why should I?  Now,
my darlings, one good spurt, and we�ll show them the colour of our
tailboard.�

We shot over the brow and flew madly down the hill with the great red
coach roaring and thundering before us.  Already we were in her dust, so
that we could see nothing but the dim scarlet blur in the heart of it,
rocking and rolling, with its outline hardening at every stride.  We
could hear the crack of the whip in front of us, and the shrill voice of
Lady Lade as she screamed to the horses.  My uncle was very quiet, but
when I glanced up at him I saw that his lips were set and his eyes
shining, with just a little flush upon each pale cheek.  There was no
need to urge on the mares, for they were already flying at a pace which
could neither be stopped nor controlled.  Our leader�s head came abreast
of the off hind wheel, then of the off front one�then for a hundred yards
we did not gain an inch, and then with a spurt the bay leader was neck to
neck with the black wheeler, and our fore wheel within an inch of their
hind one.

�Dusty work!� said my uncle, quietly.

�Fan �em, Jack!  Fan �em!� shrieked the lady.

He sprang up and lashed at his horses.

�Look out, Tregellis!� he shouted.  �There�s a damnation spill coming for
somebody.�

We had got fairly abreast of them now, the rumps of the horses exactly
a-line and the fore wheels whizzing together.  There was not six inches
to spare in the breadth of the road, and every instant I expected to feel
the jar of a locking wheel.  But now, as we came out from the dust, we
could see what was ahead, and my uncle whistled between his teeth at the
sight.

Two hundred yards or so in front of us there was a bridge, with wooden
posts and rails upon either side.  The road narrowed down at the point,
so that it was obvious that the two carriages abreast could not possibly
get over.  One must give way to the other.  Already our wheels were
abreast of their wheelers.

�I lead!� shouted my uncle.  �You must pull them, Lade!�

�Not I!� he roared.

�No, by George!� shrieked her ladyship.  �Fan �em, Jack; keep on fanning
�em!�

It seemed to me that we were all going to eternity together.  But my
uncle did the only thing that could have saved us.  By a desperate effort
we might just clear the coach before reaching the mouth of the bridge.
He sprang up, and lashed right and left at the mares, who, maddened by
the unaccustomed pain, hurled themselves on in a frenzy.  Down we
thundered together, all shouting, I believe, at the top of our voices in
the madness of the moment; but still we were drawing steadily away, and
we were almost clear of the leaders when we flew on to the bridge.  I
glanced back at the coach, and I saw Lady Lade, with her savage little
white teeth clenched together, throw herself forward and tug with both
hands at the off-side reins.

�Jam them, Jack!� she cried.  �Jam the�before they can pass.�

Had she done it an instant sooner we should have crashed against the
wood-work, carried it away, and been hurled into the deep gully below.
As it was, it was not the powerful haunch of the black leader which
caught our wheel, but the forequarter, which had not weight enough to
turn us from our course.  I saw a red wet seam gape suddenly through the
black hair, and next instant we were flying alone down the road, whilst
the four-in-hand had halted, and Sir John and his lady were down in the
road together tending to the wounded horse.

�Easy now, my beauties!� cried my uncle, settling down into his seat
again, and looking back over his shoulder.  �I could not have believed
that Sir John Lade would have been guilty of such a trick as pulling that
leader across.  I do not permit a _mauvaise plaisanterie_ of that sort.
He shall hear from me to-night.�

�It was the lady,� said I.

My uncle�s brow cleared, and he began to laugh.

�It was little Letty, was it?� said he.  �I might have known it.  There�s
a touch of the late lamented Sixteen-string Jack about the trick.  Well,
it is only messages of another kind that I send to a lady, so we�ll just
drive on our way, nephew, and thank our stars that we bring whole bones
over the Thames.�

We stopped at the Greyhound, at Croydon, where the two good little mares
were sponged and petted and fed, after which, at an easier pace, we made
our way through Norbury and Streatham.  At last the fields grew fewer and
the walls longer.  The outlying villas closed up thicker and thicker,
until their shoulders met, and we were driving between a double line of
houses with garish shops at the corners, and such a stream of traffic as
I had never seen, roaring down the centre.  Then suddenly we were on a
broad bridge with a dark coffee-brown river flowing sulkily beneath it,
and bluff-bowed barges drifting down upon its bosom.  To right and left
stretched a broken, irregular line of many-coloured houses winding along
either bank as far as I could see.

�That�s the House of Parliament, nephew,� said my uncle, pointing with
his whip, �and the black towers are Westminster Abbey.  How do, your
Grace?  How do?  That�s the Duke of Norfolk�the stout man in blue upon
the swish-tailed mare.  Now we are in Whitehall.  There�s the Treasury on
the left, and the Horse Guards, and the Admiralty, where the stone
dolphins are carved above the gate.�

I had the idea, which a country-bred lad brings up with him, that London
was merely a wilderness of houses, but I was astonished now to see the
green slopes and the lovely spring trees showing between.

�Yes, those are the Privy Gardens,� said my uncle, �and there is the
window out of which Charles took his last step on to the scaffold.  You
wouldn�t think the mares had come fifty miles, would you?  See how _les
petites cheries_ step out for the credit of their master.  Look at the
barouche, with the sharp-featured man peeping out of the window.  That�s
Pitt, going down to the House.  We are coming into Pall Mall now, and
this great building on the left is Carlton House, the Prince�s Palace.
There�s St. James�s, the big, dingy place with the clock, and the two
red-coated sentries before it.  And here�s the famous street of the same
name, nephew, which is the very centre of the world, and here�s Jermyn
Street opening out of it, and finally, here�s my own little box, and we
are well under the five hours from Brighton Old Square.�




CHAPTER IX.
WATIER�S.


MY uncle�s house in Jermyn Street was quite a small one�five rooms and an
attic.  �A man-cook and a cottage,� he said, �are all that a wise man
requires.�  On the other hand, it was furnished with the neatness and
taste which belonged to his character, so that his most luxurious friends
found something in the tiny rooms which made them discontented with their
own sumptuous mansions.  Even the attic, which had been converted into my
bedroom, was the most perfect little bijou attic that could possibly be
imagined.  Beautiful and valuable knick-knacks filled every corner of
every apartment, and the house had become a perfect miniature museum
which would have delighted a virtuoso.  My uncle explained the presence
of all these pretty things with a shrug of his shoulders and a wave of
his hands.  �They are _des petites cadeaux_,� said he, �but it would be
an indiscretion for me to say more.�

We found a note from Ambrose waiting for us which increased rather than
explained the mystery of his disappearance.

�My dear Sir Charles Tregellis,� it ran, �it will ever be a subject of
regret to me that the force of circumstances should have compelled me to
leave your service in so abrupt a fashion, but something occurred during
our journey from Friar�s Oak to Brighton which left me without any
possible alternative.  I trust, however, that my absence may prove to be
but a temporary one.  The isinglass recipe for the shirt-fronts is in the
strong-box at Drummond�s Bank.�Yours obediently, AMBROSE.�

�Well, I suppose I must fill his place as best I can,� said my uncle,
moodily.  �But how on earth could something have occurred to make him
leave me at a time when we were going full-trot down hill in my curricle?
I shall never find his match again either for chocolate or cravats.  _Je
suis desol�_!  But now, nephew, we must send to Weston and have you
fitted up.  It is not for a gentleman to go to a shop, but for the shop
to come to the gentleman.  Until you have your clothes you must remain
_en retraite_.�

The measuring was a most solemn and serious function, though it was
nothing to the trying-on two days later, when my uncle stood by in an
agony of apprehension as each garment was adjusted, he and Weston arguing
over every seam and lapel and skirt until I was dizzy with turning round
in front of them.  Then, just as I had hoped that all was settled, in
came young Mr. Brummell, who promised to be an even greater exquisite
than my uncle, and the whole matter had to be thrashed out between them.
He was a good-sized man, this Brummell, with a long, fair face, light
brown hair, and slight sandy side-whiskers.  His manner was languid, his
voice drawling, and while he eclipsed my uncle in the extravagance of his
speech, he had not the air of manliness and decision which underlay all
my kinsman�s affectations.

�Why, George,� cried my uncle, �I thought you were with your regiment.�

�I�ve sent in my papers,� drawled the other.

�I thought it would come to that.�

�Yes.  The Tenth was ordered to Manchester, and they could hardly expect
me to go to a place like that.  Besides, I found the major monstrous
rude.�

�How was that?�

�He expected me to know about his absurd drill, Tregellis, and I had
other things to think of, as you may suppose.  I had no difficulty in
taking my right place on parade, for there was a trooper with a red nose
on a flea-bitten grey, and I had observed that my post was always
immediately in front of him.  This saved a great deal of trouble.  The
other day, however, when I came on parade, I galloped up one line and
down the other, but the deuce a glimpse could I get of that long nose of
his!  Then, just as I was at my wits� end, I caught sight of him, alone
at one side; so I formed up in front.  It seems he had been put there to
keep the ground, and the major so far forgot himself as to say that I
knew nothing of my duties.�

My uncle laughed, and Brummell looked me up and down with his large,
intolerant eyes.

�These will do very passably,� said he.  �Buff and blue are always very
gentlemanlike.  But a sprigged waistcoat would have been better.�

�I think not,� said my uncle, warmly.

�My dear Tregellis, you are infallible upon a cravat, but you must allow
me the right of my own judgment upon vests.  I like it vastly as it
stands, but a touch of red sprig would give it the finish that it needs.�

They argued with many examples and analogies for a good ten minutes,
revolving round me at the same time with their heads on one side and
their glasses to their eyes.  It was a relief to me when they at last
agreed upon a compromise.

�You must not let anything I have said shake your faith in Sir Charles�s
judgment, Mr. Stone,� said Brummell, very earnestly.

I assured him that I should not.

�If you were my nephew, I should expect you to follow my taste.  But you
will cut a very good figure as it is.  I had a young cousin who came up
to town last year with a recommendation to my care.  But he would take no
advice.  At the end of the second week I met him coming down St. James�s
Street in a snuff-coloured coat cut by a country tailor.  He bowed to me.
Of course I knew what was due to myself.  I looked all round him, and
there was an end to his career in town.  You are from the country, Mr.
Stone?�

�From Sussex, sir.�

�Sussex!  Why, that is where I send my washing to.  There is an excellent
clear-starcher living near Hayward�s Heath.  I send my shirts two at a
time, for if you send more it excites the woman and diverts her
attention.  I cannot abide anything but country washing.  But I should be
vastly sorry to have to live there.  What can a man find to do?�

�You don�t hunt, George?�

�When I do, it�s a woman.  But surely you don�t go to hounds, Charles?�

�I was out with the Belvoir last winter.�

�The Belvoir!  Did you hear how I smoked Rutland?  The story has been in
the clubs this month past.  I bet him that my bag would weigh more than
his.  He got three and a half brace, but I shot his liver-coloured
pointer, so he had to pay.  But as to hunting, what amusement can there
be in flying about among a crowd of greasy, galloping farmers?  Every man
to his own taste, but Brookes�s window by day and a snug corner of the
macao table at Watier�s by night, give me all I want for mind and body.
You heard how I plucked Montague the brewer!�

�I have been out of town.�

�I had eight thousand from him at a sitting.  �I shall drink your beer in
future, Mr. Brewer,� said I.  �Every blackguard in London does,� said he.
It was monstrous impolite of him, but some people cannot lose with grace.
Well, I am going down to Clarges Street to pay Jew King a little of my
interest.  Are you bound that way?  Well, good-bye, then!  I�ll see you
and your young friend at the club or in the Mall, no doubt,� and he
sauntered off upon his way.

�That young man is destined to take my place,� said my uncle, gravely,
when Brummell had departed.  �He is quite young and of no descent, but he
has made his way by his cool effrontery, his natural taste, and his
extravagance of speech.  There is no man who can be impolite in so
polished a fashion.  He has a half-smile, and a way of raising his
eyebrows, for which he will be shot one of these mornings.  Already his
opinion is quoted in the clubs as a rival to my own.  Well, every man has
his day, and when I am convinced that mine is past, St. James�s Street
shall know me no more, for it is not in my nature to be second to any
man.  But now, nephew, in that buff and blue suit you may pass anywhere;
so, if you please, we will step into my _vis-�-vis_, and I will show you
something of the town.�

How can I describe all that we saw and all that we did upon that lovely
spring day?  To me it was as if I had been wafted to a fairy world, and
my uncle might have been some benevolent enchanter in a high-collared,
long-tailed coat, who was guiding me about in it.  He showed me the
West-end streets, with the bright carriages and the gaily dressed ladies
and sombre-clad men, all crossing and hurrying and recrossing like an
ants� nest when you turn it over with a stick.  Never had I formed a
conception of such endless banks of houses, and such a ceaseless stream
of life flowing between.  Then we passed down the Strand, where the crowd
was thicker than ever, and even penetrated beyond Temple Bar and into the
City, though my uncle begged me not to mention it, for he would not wish
it to be generally known.  There I saw the Exchange and the Bank and
Lloyd�s Coffee House, with the brown-coated, sharp-faced merchants and
the hurrying clerks, the huge horses and the busy draymen.  It was a very
different world this from that which we had left in the West�a world of
energy and of strength, where there was no place for the listless and the
idle.  Young as I was, I knew that it was here, in the forest of merchant
shipping, in the bales which swung up to the warehouse windows, in the
loaded waggons which roared over the cobblestones, that the power of
Britain lay.  Here, in the City of London, was the taproot from which
Empire and wealth and so many other fine leaves had sprouted.  Fashion
and speech and manners may change, but the spirit of enterprise within
that square mile or two of land must not change, for when it withers all
that has grown from it must wither also.

We lunched at Stephen�s, the fashionable inn in Bond Street, where I saw
a line of tilburys and saddle-horses, which stretched from the door to
the further end of the street.  And thence we went to the Mall in St.
James�s Park, and thence to Brookes�s, the great Whig club, and thence
again to Watier�s, where the men of fashion used to gamble.  Everywhere I
met the same sort of men, with their stiff figures and small waists, all
showing the utmost deference to my uncle, and for his sake an easy
tolerance of me.  The talk was always such as I had already heard at the
Pavilion: talk of politics, talk of the King�s health, talk of the
Prince�s extravagance, of the expected renewal of war, of horse-racing,
and of the ring.  I saw, too, that eccentricity was, as my uncle had told
me, the fashion; and if the folk upon the Continent look upon us even to
this day as being a nation of lunatics, it is no doubt a tradition handed
down from the time when the only travellers whom they were likely to see
were drawn from the class which I was now meeting.

It was an age of heroism and of folly.  On the one hand soldiers,
sailors, and statesmen of the quality of Pitt, Nelson, and afterwards
Wellington, had been forced to the front by the imminent menace of
Buonaparte.  We were great in arms, and were soon also to be great in
literature, for Scott and Byron were in their day the strongest forces in
Europe.  On the other hand, a touch of madness, real or assumed, was a
passport through doors which were closed to wisdom and to virtue.  The
man who could enter a drawing-room walking upon his hands, the man who
had filed his teeth that he might whistle like a coachman, the man who
always spoke his thoughts aloud and so kept his guests in a quiver of
apprehension, these were the people who found it easy to come to the
front in London society.  Nor could the heroism and the folly be kept
apart, for there were few who could quite escape the contagion of the
times.  In an age when the Premier was a heavy drinker, the Leader of the
Opposition a libertine, and the Prince of Wales a combination of the two,
it was hard to know where to look for a man whose private and public
characters were equally lofty.  At the same time, with all its faults it
was a _strong_ age, and you will be fortunate if in your time the country
produces five such names as Pitt, Fox, Scott, Nelson, and Wellington.

It was in Watier�s that night, seated by my uncle on one of the red
velvet settees at the side of the room, that I had pointed out to me some
of those singular characters whose fame and eccentricities are even now
not wholly forgotten in the world.  The long, many-pillared room, with
its mirrors and chandeliers, was crowded with full-blooded, loud-voiced
men-about-town, all in the same dark evening dress with white silk
stockings, cambric shirt-fronts, and little, flat chapeau-bras under
their arms.

�The acid-faced old gentleman with the thin legs is the Marquis of
Queensberry,� said my uncle.  �His chaise was driven nineteen miles in an
hour in a match against the Count Taafe, and he sent a message fifty
miles in thirty minutes by throwing it from hand to hand in a
cricket-ball.  The man he is talking to is Sir Charles Bunbury, of the
Jockey Club, who had the Prince warned off the Heath at Newmarket on
account of the in-and-out riding of Sam Chifney, his jockey.  There�s
Captain Barclay going up to them now.  He knows more about training than
any man alive, and he has walked ninety miles in twenty-one hours.  You
have only to look at his calves to see that Nature built him for it.
There�s another walker there, the man with a flowered vest standing near
the fireplace.  That is Buck Whalley, who walked to Jerusalem in a long
blue coat, top-boots, and buckskins.�

�Why did he do that, sir?� I asked, in astonishment.

My uncle shrugged his shoulders.

�It was his humour,� said he.  �He walked into society through it, and
that was better worth reaching than Jerusalem.  There�s Lord Petersham,
the man with the beaky nose.  He always rises at six in the evening, and
he has laid down the finest cellar of snuff in Europe.  It was he who
ordered his valet to put half a dozen of sherry by his bed and call him
the day after to-morrow.  He�s talking to Lord Panmure, who can take his
six bottles of claret and argue with a bishop after it.  The lean man
with the weak knees is General Scott who lives upon toast and water and
has won �200,000 at whist.  He is talking to young Lord Blandford who
gave �1800 for a Boccaccio the other day.  Evening, Dudley!�

�Evening, Tregellis!�  An elderly, vacant-looking man had stopped before
us and was looking me up and down.

�Some young cub Charlie Tregellis has caught in the country,� he
murmured.  �He doesn�t look as if he would be much credit to him.  Been
out of town, Tregellis?�

�For a few days.�

�Hem!� said the man, transferring his sleepy gaze to my uncle.  �He�s
looking pretty bad.  He�ll be going into the country feet foremost some
of these days if he doesn�t pull up!�  He nodded, and passed on.

�You mustn�t look so mortified, nephew,� said my uncle, smiling.  �That�s
old Lord Dudley, and he has a trick of thinking aloud.  People used to be
offended, but they take no notice of him now.  It was only last week,
when he was dining at Lord Elgin�s, that he apologized to the company for
the shocking bad cooking.  He thought he was at his own table, you see.
It gives him a place of his own in society.  That�s Lord Harewood he has
fastened on to now.  Harewood�s peculiarity is to mimic the Prince in
everything.  One day the Prince hid his queue behind the collar of his
coat, so Harewood cut his off, thinking that they were going out of
fashion.  Here�s Lumley, the ugly man.  �_L�homme laid_� they called him
in Paris.  The other one is Lord Foley�they call him No. 11, on account
of his thin legs.�

�There is Mr. Brummell, sir,� said I.

�Yes, he�ll come to us presently.  That young man has certainly a future
before him.  Do you observe the way in which he looks round the room from
under his drooping eyelids, as though it were a condescension that he
should have entered it?  Small conceits are intolerable, but when they
are pushed to the uttermost they become respectable.  How do, George?�

�Have you heard about Vereker Merton?� asked Brummell, strolling up with
one or two other exquisites at his heels.  �He has run away with his
father�s woman-cook, and actually married her.�

�What did Lord Merton do?�

�He congratulated him warmly, and confessed that he had always underrated
his intelligence.  He is to live with the young couple, and make a
handsome allowance on condition that the bride sticks to her old duties.
By the way, there was a rumour that you were about to marry, Tregellis.�

�I think not,� answered my uncle.  �It would be a mistake to overwhelm
one by attentions which are a pleasure to many.�

�My view, exactly, and very neatly expressed,� cried Brummell.  �Is it
fair to break a dozen hearts in order to intoxicate one with rapture?
I�m off to the Continent next week.�

�Bailiffs?� asked one of his companions.

�Too bad, Pierrepoint.  No, no; it is pleasure and instruction combined.
Besides, it is necessary to go to Paris for your little things, and if
there is a chance of the war breaking out again, it would be well to lay
in a supply.�

�Quite right,� said my uncle, who seemed to have made up his mind to
outdo Brummell in extravagance.  �I used to get my sulphur-coloured
gloves from the Palais Royal.  When the war broke out in �93 I was cut
off from them for nine years.  Had it not been for a lugger which I
specially hired to smuggle them, I might have been reduced to English
tan.�

�The English are excellent at a flat-iron or a kitchen poker, but
anything more delicate is beyond them.�

�Our tailors are good,� cried my uncle, �but our stuffs lack taste and
variety.  The war has made us more _rococo_ than ever.  It has cut us off
from travel, and there is nothing to match travel for expanding the mind.
Last year, for example, I came upon some new waist-coating in the Square
of San Marco, at Venice.  It was yellow, with the prettiest little twill
of pink running through it.  How could I have seen it had I not
travelled?  I brought it back with me, and for a time it was all the
rage.�

�The Prince took it up.�

�Yes, he usually follows my lead.  We dressed so alike last year that we
were frequently mistaken for each other.  It tells against me, but so it
was.  He often complains that things do not look as well upon him as upon
me, but how can I make the obvious reply?  By the way, George, I did not
see you at the Marchioness of Dover�s ball.�

�Yes, I was there, and lingered for a quarter of an hour or so.  I am
surprised that you did not see me.  I did not go past the doorway,
however, for undue preference gives rise to jealousy.�

�I went early,� said my uncle, �for I had heard that there were to be
some tolerable _d�butantes_.  It always pleases me vastly when I am able
to pass a compliment to any of them.  It has happened, but not often, for
I keep to my own standard.�

So they talked, these singular men, and I, looking from one to the other,
could not imagine how they could help bursting out a-laughing in each
other�s faces.  But, on the contrary, their conversation was very grave,
and filled out with many little bows, and opening and shutting of
snuff-boxes, and flickings of laced handkerchiefs.  Quite a crowd had
gathered silently around, and I could see that the talk had been regarded
as a contest between two men who were looked upon as rival arbiters of
fashion.  It was finished by the Marquis of Queensberry passing his arm
through Brummell�s and leading him off, while my uncle threw out his
laced cambric shirt-front and shot his ruffles as if he were well
satisfied with his share in the encounter.  It is seven-and-forty years
since I looked upon that circle of dandies, and where, now, are their
dainty little hats, their wonderful waistcoats, and their boots, in which
one could arrange one�s cravat?  They lived strange lives, these men, and
they died strange deaths�some by their own hands, some as beggars, some
in a debtor�s gaol, some, like the most brilliant of them all, in a
madhouse in a foreign land.

�There is the card-room, Rodney,� said my uncle, as we passed an open
door on our way out.  Glancing in, I saw a line of little green baize
tables with small groups of men sitting round, while at one side was a
longer one, from which there came a continuous murmur of voices.  �You
may lose what you like in there, save only your nerve or your temper,� my
uncle continued.  �Ah, Sir Lothian, I trust that the luck was with you?�

A tall, thin man, with a hard, austere face, had stepped out of the open
doorway.  His heavily thatched eyebrows covered quick, furtive grey eyes,
and his gaunt features were hollowed at the cheek and temple like
water-grooved flint.  He was dressed entirely in black, and I noticed
that his shoulders swayed a little as if he had been drinking.

�Lost like the deuce,� he snapped.

�Dice?�

�No, whist.�

�You couldn�t get very hard hit over that.�

�Couldn�t you?� he snarled.  �Play a hundred a trick and a thousand on
the rub, losing steadily for five hours, and see what you think of it.�

My uncle was evidently struck by the haggard look upon the other�s face.

�I hope it�s not very bad,� he said.

�Bad enough.  It won�t bear talking about.  By the way, Tregellis, have
you got your man for this fight yet?�

�No.�

�You seem to be hanging in the wind a long time.  It�s play or pay, you
know.  I shall claim forfeit if you don�t come to scratch.�

�If you will name your day I shall produce my man, Sir Lothian,� said my
uncle, coldly.

�This day four weeks, if you like.�

�Very good.  The 18th of May.�

�I hope to have changed my name by then!�

�How is that?� asked my uncle, in surprise.

�It is just possible that I may be Lord Avon.�

�What, you have had some news?� cried my uncle, and I noticed a tremor in
his voice.

�I�ve had my agent over at Monte Video, and he believes he has proof that
Avon died there.  Anyhow, it is absurd to suppose that because a murderer
chooses to fly from justice��

�I won�t have you use that word, Sir Lothian,� cried my uncle, sharply.

�You were there as I was.  You know that he was a murderer.�

�I tell you that you shall not say so.�

Sir Lothian�s fierce little grey eyes had to lower themselves before the
imperious anger which shone in my uncle�s.

�Well, to let that point pass, it is monstrous to suppose that the title
and the estates can remain hung up in this way for ever.  I�m the heir,
Tregellis, and I�m going to have my rights.�

�I am, as you are aware, Lord Avon�s dearest friend,� said my uncle,
sternly.  �His disappearance has not affected my love for him, and until
his fate is finally ascertained, I shall exert myself to see that _his_
rights also are respected.�

�His rights would be a long drop and a cracked spine,� Sir Lothian
answered, and then, changing his manner suddenly, he laid his hand upon
my uncle�s sleeve.

�Come, come, Tregellis, I was his friend as well as you,� said he.  �But
we cannot alter the facts, and it is rather late in the day for us to
fall out over them.  Your invitation holds good for Friday night?�

�Certainly.�

�I shall bring Crab Wilson with me, and finally arrange the conditions of
our little wager.�

�Very good, Sir Lothian: I shall hope to see you.�  They bowed, and my
uncle stood a little time looking after him as he made his way amidst the
crowd.

�A good sportsman, nephew,� said he.  �A bold rider, the best pistol-shot
in England, but . . . a dangerous man!�




CHAPTER X.
THE MEN OF THE RING.


IT was at the end of my first week in London that my uncle gave a supper
to the fancy, as was usual for gentlemen of that time if they wished to
figure before the public as Corinthians and patrons of sport.  He had
invited not only the chief fighting-men of the day, but also those men of
fashion who were most interested in the ring: Mr. Fletcher Reid, Lord Say
and Sele, Sir Lothian Hume, Sir John Lade, Colonel Montgomery, Sir Thomas
Apreece, the Hon. Berkeley Craven, and many more.  The rumour that the
Prince was to be present had already spread through the clubs, and
invitations were eagerly sought after.

The Waggon and Horses was a well-known sporting house, with an old
prize-fighter for landlord.  And the arrangements were as primitive as
the most Bohemian could wish.  It was one of the many curious fashions
which have now died out, that men who were _blas�_ from luxury and high
living seemed to find a fresh piquancy in life by descending to the
lowest resorts, so that the night-houses and gambling-dens in Covent
Garden or the Haymarket often gathered illustrious company under their
smoke-blackened ceilings.  It was a change for them to turn their backs
upon the cooking of Weltjie and of Ude, or the chambertin of old Q., and
to dine upon a porter-house steak washed down by a pint of ale from a
pewter pot.

A rough crowd had assembled in the street to see the fighting-men go in,
and my uncle warned me to look to my pockets as we pushed our way through
it.  Within was a large room with faded red curtains, a sanded floor, and
walls which were covered with prints of pugilists and race-horses.  Brown
liquor-stained tables were dotted about in it, and round one of these
half a dozen formidable-looking men were seated, while one, the roughest
of all, was perched upon the table itself, swinging his legs to and fro.
A tray of small glasses and pewter mugs stood beside them.

�The boys were thirsty, sir, so I brought up some ale and some liptrap,�
whispered the landlord; �I thought you would have no objection, sir.�

�Quite right, Bob!  How are you all?  How are you, Maddox?  How are you,
Baldwin?  Ah, Belcher, I am very glad to see you.�

The fighting-men rose and took their hats off, except the fellow on the
table, who continued to swing his legs and to look my uncle very coolly
in the face.

�How are you, Berks?�

�Pretty tidy.  �Ow are you?�

�Say �sir� when you speak to a genelman,� said Belcher, and with a sudden
tilt of the table he sent Berks flying almost into my uncle�s arms.

�See now, Jem, none o� that!� said Berks, sulkily.

�I�ll learn you manners, Joe, which is more than ever your father did.
You�re not drinkin� black-jack in a boozin� ken, but you are meetin�
noble, slap-up Corinthians, and it�s for you to behave as such.�

�I�ve always been reckoned a genelman-like sort of man,� said Berks,
thickly, �but if so be as I�ve said or done what I �adn�t ought to��

�There, there, Berks, that�s all right!� cried my uncle, only too anxious
to smooth things over and to prevent a quarrel at the outset of the
evening.  �Here are some more of our friends.  How are you, Apreece?  How
are you, Colonel?  Well, Jackson, you are looking vastly better.  Good
evening, Lade.  I trust Lady Lade was none the worse for our pleasant
drive.  Ah, Mendoza, you look fit enough to throw your hat over the ropes
this instant.  Sir Lothian, I am glad to see you.  You will find some old
friends here.�

Amid the stream of Corinthians and fighting-men who were thronging into
the room I had caught a glimpse of the sturdy figure and broad,
good-humoured face of Champion Harrison.  The sight of him was like a
whiff of South Down air coming into that low-roofed, oil-smelling room,
and I ran forward to shake him by the hand.

�Why, Master Rodney�or I should say Mr. Stone, I suppose�you�ve changed
out of all knowledge.  I can�t hardly believe that it was really you that
used to come down to blow the bellows when Boy Jim and I were at the
anvil.  Well, you are fine, to be sure!�

�What�s the news of Friar�s Oak?� I asked eagerly.

�Your father was down to chat with me, Master Rodney, and he tells me
that the war is going to break out again, and that he hopes to see you
here in London before many days are past; for he is coming up to see Lord
Nelson and to make inquiry about a ship.  Your mother is well, and I saw
her in church on Sunday.�

�And Boy Jim?�

Champion Harrison�s good-humoured face clouded over.

�He�d set his heart very much on comin� here to-night, but there were
reasons why I didn�t wish him to, and so there�s a shadow betwixt us.
It�s the first that ever was, and I feel it, Master Rodney.  Between
ourselves, I have very good reason to wish him to stay with me, and I am
sure that, with his high spirit and his ideas, he would never settle down
again after once he had a taste o� London.  I left him behind me with
enough work to keep him busy until I get back to him.�

A tall and beautifully proportioned man, very elegantly dressed, was
strolling towards us.  He stared in surprise and held out his hand to my
companion.

�Why, Jack Harrison!� he cried.  �This is a resurrection.  Where in the
world did you come from?�

�Glad to see you, Jackson,� said my companion.  �You look as well and as
young as ever.�

�Thank you, yes.  I resigned the belt when I could get no one to fight me
for it, and I took to teaching.�

�I�m doing smith�s work down Sussex way.�

�I�ve often wondered why you never had a shy at my belt.  I tell you
honestly, between man and man, I�m very glad you didn�t.�

�Well, it�s real good of you to say that, Jackson.  I might ha� done it,
perhaps, but the old woman was against it.  She�s been a good wife to me
and I can�t go against her.  But I feel a bit lonesome here, for these
boys are since my time.�

�You could do some of them over now,� said Jackson, feeling my friend�s
upper arm.  �No better bit of stuff was ever seen in a twenty-four foot
ring.  It would be a rare treat to see you take some of these young ones
on.  Won�t you let me spring you on them?�

Harrison�s eyes glistened at the idea, but he shook his head.

�It won�t do, Jackson.  My old woman holds my promise.  That�s Belcher,
ain�t it�the good lookin� young chap with the flash coat?�

�Yes, that�s Jem.  You�ve not seen him!  He�s a jewel.�

�So I�ve heard.  Who�s the youngster beside him?  He looks a tidy chap.�

�That�s a new man from the West.  Crab Wilson�s his name.�

Harrison looked at him with interest.  �I�ve heard of him,� said he.
�They are getting a match on for him, ain�t they?�

�Yes.  Sir Lothian Hume, the thin-faced gentleman over yonder, has backed
him against Sir Charles Tregellis�s man.  We�re to hear about the match
to-night, I understand.  Jem Belcher thinks great things of Crab Wilson.
There�s Belcher�s young brother, Tom.  He�s looking out for a match, too.
They say he�s quicker than Jem with the mufflers, but he can�t hit as
hard.  I was speaking of your brother, Jem.�

�The young �un will make his way,� said Belcher, who had come across to
us.  �He�s more a sparrer than a fighter just at present, but when his
gristle sets he�ll take on anything on the list.  Bristol�s as full o�
young fightin�-men now as a bin is of bottles.  We�ve got two more comin�
up�Gully and Pearce�who�ll make you London milling coves wish they was
back in the west country again.�

�Here�s the Prince,� said Jackson, as a hum and bustle rose from the
door.

I saw George come bustling in, with a good-humoured smile upon his comely
face.  My uncle welcomed him, and led some of the Corinthians up to be
presented.

�We�ll have trouble, gov�nor,� said Belcher to Jackson.  �Here�s Joe
Berks drinkin� gin out of a mug, and you know what a swine he is when
he�s drunk.�

�You must put a stopper on �im gov�nor,� said several of the other
prize-fighters.  ��E ain�t what you�d call a charmer when �e�s sober, but
there�s no standing �im when �e�s fresh.�

Jackson, on account of his prowess and of the tact which he possessed,
had been chosen as general regulator of the whole prize-fighting body, by
whom he was usually alluded to as the Commander-in-Chief.  He and Belcher
went across now to the table upon which Berks was still perched.  The
ruffian�s face was already flushed, and his eyes heavy and bloodshot.

�You must keep yourself in hand to-night, Berks,� said Jackson.  �The
Prince is here, and��

�I never set eyes on �im yet,� cried Berks, lurching off the table.
�Where is �e, gov�nor?  Tell �im Joe Berks would like to do �isself proud
by shakin� �im by the �and.�

�No, you don�t, Joe,� said Jackson, laying his hand upon Berks�s chest,
as he tried to push his way through the crowd.  �You�ve got to keep your
place, Joe, or we�ll put you where you can make all the noise you like.�

�Where�s that, gov�nor?�

�Into the street, through the window.  We�re going to have a peaceful
evening, as Jem Belcher and I will show you if you get up to any of your
Whitechapel games.�

�No �arm, gov�nor,� grumbled Berks.  �I�m sure I�ve always �ad the name
of bein� a very genelman-like man.�

�So I�ve always said, Joe Berks, and mind you prove yourself such.  But
the supper is ready for us, and there�s the Prince and Lord Sole going
in.  Two and two, lads, and don�t forget whose company you are in.�

The supper was laid in a large room, with Union Jacks and mottoes hung
thickly upon the walls.  The tables were arranged in three sides of a
square, my uncle occupying the centre of the principal one, with the
Prince upon his right and Lord Sele upon his left.  By his wise
precaution the seats had been allotted beforehand, so that the gentlemen
might be scattered among the professionals and no risk run of two enemies
finding themselves together, or a man who had been recently beaten
falling into the company of his conqueror.  For my own part, I had
Champion Harrison upon one side of me and a stout, florid-faced man upon
the other, who whispered to me that he was �Bill Warr, landlord of the
One Tun public-house, of Jermyn Street, and one of the gamest men upon
the list.�

�It�s my flesh that�s beat me, sir,� said he.  �It creeps over me amazin�
fast.  I should fight at thirteen-eight, and �ere I am nearly seventeen.
It�s the business that does it, what with loflin� about behind the bar
all day, and bein� afraid to refuse a wet for fear of offendin� a
customer.  It�s been the ruin of many a good fightin�-man before me.�

�You should take to my job,� said Harrison.  �I�m a smith by trade, and
I�ve not put on half a stone in fifteen years.�

�Some take to one thing and some to another, but the most of us try to
�ave a bar-parlour of our own.  There�s Will Wood, that I beat in forty
rounds in the thick of a snowstorm down Navestock way, �e drives a
�ackney.  Young Firby, the ruffian, �e�s a waiter now.  Dick �Umphries
sells coals��e was always of a genelmanly disposition.  George Ingleston
is a brewer�s drayman.  We all find our own cribs.  But there�s one thing
you are saved by livin� in the country, and that is �avin� the young
Corinthians and bloods about town smackin� you eternally in the face.�

This was the last inconvenience which I should have expected a famous
prize-fighter to be subjected to, but several bull-faced fellows at the
other side of the table nodded their concurrence.

�You�re right, Bill,� said one of them.  �There�s no one has had more
trouble with them than I have.  In they come of an evenin� into my bar,
with the wine in their heads.  �Are you Tom Owen the bruiser?� says one
o� them.  �At your service, sir,� says I.  �Take that, then,� says he,
and it�s a clip on the nose, or a backhanded slap across the chops as
likely as not.  Then they can brag all their lives that they had hit Tom
Owen.�

�D�you draw their cork in return?� asked Harrison.

�I argey it out with them.  I say to them, �Now, gents, fightin� is my
profession, and I don�t fight for love any more than a doctor doctors for
love, or a butcher gives away a loin chop.  Put up a small purse, master,
and I�ll do you over and proud.  But don�t expect that you�re goin� to
come here and get glutted by a middle-weight champion for nothing.�

�That�s my way too, Tom,� said my burly neighbour.  �If they put down a
guinea on the counter�which they do if they �ave been drinkin� very
�eavy�I give them what I think is about a guinea�s worth and take the
money.�

�But if they don�t?�

�Why, then, it�s a common assault, d�ye see, against the body of �is
Majesty�s liege, William Warr, and I �as �em before the beak next
mornin�, and it�s a week or twenty shillin�s.�

Meanwhile the supper was in full swing�one of those solid and
uncompromising meals which prevailed in the days of your grandfathers,
and which may explain to some of you why you never set eyes upon that
relative.

Great rounds of beef, saddles of mutton, smoking tongues, veal and ham
pies, turkeys and chickens, and geese, with every variety of vegetables,
and a succession of fiery cherries and heavy ales were the main staple of
the feast.  It was the same meal and the same cooking as their Norse or
German ancestors might have sat down to fourteen centuries before, and,
indeed, as I looked through the steam of the dishes at the lines of
fierce and rugged faces, and the mighty shoulders which rounded
themselves over the board, I could have imagined myself at one of those
old-world carousals of which I had read, where the savage company gnawed
the joints to the bone, and then, with murderous horseplay, hurled the
remains at their prisoners.  Here and there the pale, aquiline features
of a sporting Corinthian recalled rather the Norman type, but in the main
these stolid, heavy-jowled faces, belonging to men whose whole life was a
battle, were the nearest suggestion which we have had in modern times of
those fierce pirates and rovers from whose loins we have sprung.

And yet, as I looked carefully from man to man in the line which faced
me, I could see that the English, although they were ten to one, had not
the game entirely to themselves, but that other races had shown that they
could produce fighting-men worthy to rank with the best.

There were, it is true, no finer or braver men in the room than Jackson
and Jem Belcher, the one with his magnificent figure, his small waist and
Herculean shoulders; the other as graceful as an old Grecian statue, with
a head whose beauty many a sculptor had wished to copy, and with those
long, delicate lines in shoulder and loins and limbs, which gave him the
litheness and activity of a panther.  Already, as I looked at him, it
seemed to me that there was a shadow of tragedy upon his face, a forecast
of the day then but a few months distant when a blow from a racquet ball
darkened the sight of one eye for ever.  Had he stopped there, with his
unbeaten career behind him, then indeed the evening of his life might
have been as glorious as its dawn.  But his proud heart could not permit
his title to be torn from him without a struggle.  If even now you can
read how the gallant fellow, unable with his one eye to judge his
distances, fought for thirty-five minutes against his young and
formidable opponent, and how, in the bitterness of defeat, he was heard
only to express his sorrow for a friend who had backed him with all he
possessed, and if you are not touched by the story there must be
something wanting in you which should go to the making of a man.

But if there were no men at the tables who could have held their own
against Jackson or Jem Belcher, there were others of a different race and
type who had qualities which made them dangerous bruisers.  A little way
down the room I saw the black face and woolly head of Bill Richmond, in a
purple-and-gold footman�s livery�destined to be the predecessor of
Molineaux, Sutton, and all that line of black boxers who have shown that
the muscular power and insensibility to pain which distinguish the
African give him a peculiar advantage in the sports of the ring.  He
could boast also of the higher honour of having been the first born
American to win laurels in the British ring.  There also I saw the keen
features of Dada Mendoza, the Jew, just retired from active work, and
leaving behind him a reputation for elegance and perfect science which
has, to this day, never been exceeded.  The worst fault that the critics
could find with him was that there was a want of power in his blows�a
remark which certainly could not have been made about his neighbour,
whose long face, curved nose, and dark, flashing eyes proclaimed him as a
member of the same ancient race.  This was the formidable Dutch Sam, who
fought at nine stone six, and yet possessed such hitting powers, that his
admirers, in after years, were willing to back him against the
fourteen-stone Tom Cribb, if each were strapped a-straddle to a bench.
Half a dozen other sallow Hebrew faces showed how energetically the Jews
of Houndsditch and Whitechapel had taken to the sport of the land of
their adoption, and that in this, as in more serious fields of human
effort, they could hold their own with the best.

It was my neighbour Warr who very good-humouredly pointed out to me all
these celebrities, the echoes of whose fame had been wafted down even to
our little Sussex village.

�There�s Andrew Gamble, the Irish champion,� said he.  �It was �e that
beat Noah James, the Guardsman, and was afterwards nearly killed by Jem
Belcher, in the �ollow of Wimbledon Common by Abbershaw�s gibbet.  The
two that are next �im are Irish also, Jack O�Donnell and Bill Ryan.  When
you get a good Irishman you can�t better �em, but they�re dreadful �asty.
That little cove with the leery face is Caleb Baldwin the Coster, �im
that they call the Pride of Westminster.  �E�s but five foot seven, and
nine stone five, but �e�s got the �eart of a giant.  �E�s never been
beat, and there ain�t a man within a stone of �im that could beat �im,
except only Dutch Sam.  There�s George Maddox, too, another o� the same
breed, and as good a man as ever pulled his coat off.  The genelmanly man
that eats with a fork, �im what looks like a Corinthian, only that the
bridge of �is nose ain�t quite as it ought to be, that�s Dick �Umphries,
the same that was cock of the middle-weights until Mendoza cut his comb
for �im.  You see the other with the grey �ead and the scars on his
face?�

�Why, it�s old Tom Faulkner the cricketer!� cried Harrison, following the
line of Bill Warr�s stubby forefinger.  �He�s the fastest bowler in the
Midlands, and at his best there weren�t many boxers in England that could
stand up against him.�

�You�re right there, Jack �Arrison.  �E was one of the three who came up
to fight when the best men of Birmingham challenged the best men of
London.  �E�s an evergreen, is Tom.  Why, he was turned five-and-fifty
when he challenged and beat, after fifty minutes of it, Jack Thornhill,
who was tough enough to take it out of many a youngster.  It�s better to
give odds in weight than in years.�

�Youth will be served,� said a crooning voice from the other side of the
table.  �Ay, masters, youth will be served.�

The man who had spoken was the most extraordinary of all the many curious
figures in the room.  He was very, very old, so old that he was past all
comparison, and no one by looking at his mummy skin and fish-like eyes
could give a guess at his years.  A few scanty grey hairs still hung
about his yellow scalp.  As to his features, they were scarcely human in
their disfigurement, for the deep wrinkles and pouchings of extreme age
had been added to a face which had always been grotesquely ugly, and had
been crushed and smashed in addition by many a blow.  I had noticed this
creature at the beginning of the meal, leaning his chest against the edge
of the table as if its support was a welcome one, and feebly picking at
the food which was placed before him.  Gradually, however, as his
neighbours plied him with drink, his shoulders grew squarer, his back
stiffened, his eyes brightened, and he looked about him, with an air of
surprise at first, as if he had no clear recollection of how he came
there, and afterwards with an expression of deepening interest, as he
listened, with his ear scooped up in his hand, to the conversation around
him.

�That�s old Buckhorse,� whispered Champion Harrison.  �He was just the
same as that when I joined the ring twenty years ago.  Time was when he
was the terror of London.�

��E was so,� said Bill Warr.  ��E would fight like a stag, and �e was
that �ard that �e would let any swell knock �im down for �alf-a-crown.
�E �ad no face to spoil, d�ye see, for �e was always the ugliest man in
England.  But �e�s been on the shelf now for near sixty years, and it
cost �im many a beatin� before �e could understand that �is strength was
slippin� away from �im.�

�Youth will be served, masters,� droned the old man, shaking his head
miserably.

�Fill up �is glass,� said Warr.  ��Ere, Tom, give old Buckhorse a sup o�
liptrap.  Warm his �eart for �im.�

The old man poured a glass of neat gin down his shrivelled throat, and
the effect upon him was extraordinary.  A light glimmered in each of his
dull eyes, a tinge of colour came into his wax-like cheeks, and, opening
his toothless mouth, he suddenly emitted a peculiar, bell-like, and most
musical cry.  A hoarse roar of laughter from all the company answered it,
and flushed faces craned over each other to catch a glimpse of the
veteran.

�There�s Buckhorse!� they cried.  �Buckhorse is comin� round again.�

�You can laugh if you vill, masters,� he cried, in his Lewkner Lane
dialect, holding up his two thin, vein-covered hands.  �It von�t be long
that you�ll be able to see my crooks vich �ave been on Figg�s conk, and
on Jack Broughton�s, and on �Arry Gray�s, and many another good fightin�
man that was millin� for a livin� before your fathers could eat pap.�

The company laughed again, and encouraged the old man by half-derisive
and half-affectionate cries.

�Let �em �ave it, Buckhorse!  Give it �em straight!  Tell us how the
millin� coves did it in your time.�

The old gladiator looked round him in great contempt.

�Vy, from vot I see,� he cried, in his high, broken treble, �there�s some
on you that ain�t fit to flick a fly from a joint o� meat.  You�d make
werry good ladies� maids, the most of you, but you took the wrong turnin�
ven you came into the ring.�

�Give �im a wipe over the mouth,� said a hoarse voice.

�Joe Berks,� said Jackson, �I�d save the hangman the job of breaking your
neck if His Royal Highness wasn�t in the room.�

�That�s as it may be, guv�nor,� said the half-drunken ruffian, staggering
to his feet.  �If I�ve said anything wot isn�t genelmanlike��

�Sit down, Berks!� cried my uncle, with such a tone of command that the
fellow collapsed into his chair.

�Vy, vitch of you would look Tom Slack in the face?� piped the old
fellow; �or Jack Broughton?�him vot told the old Dook of Cumberland that
all he vanted vas to fight the King o� Proosia�s guard, day by day, year
in, year out, until �e �ad worked out the whole regiment of �em�and the
smallest of �em six foot long.  There�s not more�n a few of you could �it
a dint in a pat o� butter, and if you gets a smack or two it�s all over
vith you.  Vich among you could get up again after such a vipe as the
Eytalian Gondoleery cove gave to Bob Vittaker?�

�What was that, Buckhorse?� cried several voices.

��E came over �ere from voreign parts, and �e was so broad �e �ad to come
edgewise through the doors.  �E �ad so, upon my davy!  �E was that strong
that wherever �e �it the bone had got to go; and when �e�d cracked a jaw
or two it looked as though nothing in the country could stan� against
him.  So the King �e sent one of his genelmen down to Figg and he said to
him: ��Ere�s a cove vot cracks a bone every time �e lets vly, and it�ll
be little credit to the Lunnon boys if they lets �im get avay vithout a
vacking.�  So Figg he ups, and he says, �I do not know, master, but he
may break one of �is countrymen�s jawbones vid �is vist, but I�ll bring
�im a Cockney lad and �e shall not be able to break �is jawbone with a
sledge �ammer.�  I was with Figg in Slaughter�s coffee-�ouse, as then
vas, ven �e says this to the King�s genelman, and I goes so, I does!�
Again he emitted the curious bell-like cry, and again the Corinthians and
the fighting-men laughed and applauded him.

�His Royal Highness�that is, the Earl of Chester�would be glad to hear
the end of your story, Buckhorse,� said my uncle, to whom the Prince had
been whispering.

�Vell, your R�yal �Ighness, it vas like this.  Ven the day came round,
all the volk came to Figg�s Amphitheatre, the same that vos in Tottenham
Court, an� Bob Vittaker �e vos there, and the Eytalian Gondoleery cove �e
vas there, and all the purlitest, genteelest crowd that ever vos, twenty
thousand of �em, all sittin� with their �eads like purtaties on a barrer,
banked right up round the stage, and me there to pick up Bob, d�ye see,
and Jack Figg �imself just for fair play to do vot was right by the cove
from voreign parts.  They vas packed all round, the folks was, but down
through the middle of �em was a passage just so as the gentry could come
through to their seats, and the stage it vas of wood, as the custom then
vas, and a man�s �eight above the �eads of the people.  Vell, then, ven
Bob was put up opposite this great Eytalian man I says �Slap �im in the
vind, Bob,� �cos I could see vid �alf an eye that he vas as puffy as a
cheesecake; so Bob he goes in, and as he comes the vorriner let �im �ave
it amazin� on the conk.  I �eard the thump of it, and I kind o� velt
somethin� vistle past me, but ven I looked there vas the Eytalian a
feelin� of �is muscles in the middle o� the stage, and as to Bob, there
vern�t no sign� of �im at all no more�n if �e�d never been.�

His audience was riveted by the old prize-fighter�s story.  �Well,� cried
a dozen voices, �what then, Buckhorse: �ad �e swallowed �im, or what?�

�Yell, boys, that vas vat _I_ wondered, when sudden I seed two legs
a-stickin� up out o� the crowd a long vay off, just like these two
vingers, d�ye see, and I knewed they vas Bob�s legs, seein� that �e �ad
kind o� yellow small clothes vid blue ribbons�vich blue vas �is colour�at
the knee.  So they up-ended �im, they did, an� they made a lane for �im
an� cheered �im to give �im �eart, though �e never lacked for that.  At
virst �e vas that dazed that �e didn�t know if �e vas in church or in
�Orsemonger Gaol; but ven I�d bit �is two ears �e shook �isself together.
�Ve�ll try it again, Buck,� says �e.  �The mark!� says I.  And �e vinked
all that vas left o� one eye.  So the Eytalian �e lets swing again, but
Bob �e jumps inside an� �e lets �im �ave it plumb square on the meat safe
as �ard as ever the Lord would let �im put it in.�

�Well?  Well?�

�Vell, the Eytalian �e got a touch of the gurgles, an� �e shut �imself
right up like a two-foot rule.  Then �e pulled �imself straight, an� �e
gave the most awful Glory Allelujah screech as ever you �eard.  Off �e
jumps from the stage an� down the passage as �ard as �is �oofs would
carry �im.  Up jumps the �ole crowd, and after �im as �ard as they could
move for laughin�.  They vas lyin� in the kennel three deep all down
Tottenham Court road wid their �ands to their sides just vit to break
themselves in two.  Vell, ve chased �im down �Olburn, an� down Fleet
Street, an� down Cheapside, an� past the �Change, and on all the vay to
Voppin� an� we only catched �im in the shippin� office, vere �e vas
askin� �ow soon �e could get a passage to voreign parts.�

There was much laughter and clapping of glasses upon the table at the
conclusion of old Buckhorse�s story, and I saw the Prince of Wales hand
something to the waiter, who brought it round and slipped it into the
skinny hand of the veteran, who spat upon it before thrusting it into his
pocket.  The table had in the meanwhile been cleared, and was now studded
with bottles and glasses, while long clay pipes and tobacco-boxes were
handed round.  My uncle never smoked, thinking that the habit might
darken his teeth, but many of the Corinthians, and the Prince amongst the
first of them, set the example of lighting up.  All restraint had been
done away with, and the prize-fighters, flushed with wine, roared across
the tables to each other, or shouted their greetings to friends at the
other end of the room.  The amateurs, falling into the humour of their
company, were hardly less noisy, and loudly debated the merits of the
different men, criticizing their styles of fighting before their faces,
and making bets upon the results of future matches.

In the midst of the uproar there was an imperative rap upon the table,
and my uncle rose to speak.  As he stood with his pale, calm face and
fine figure, I had never seen him to greater advantage, for he seemed,
with all his elegance, to have a quiet air of domination amongst these
fierce fellows, like a huntsman walking carelessly through a springing
and yapping pack.  He expressed his pleasure at seeing so many good
sportsmen under one roof, and acknowledged the honour which had been done
both to his guests and himself by the presence there that night of the
illustrious personage whom he should refer to as the Earl of Chester.  He
was sorry that the season prevented him from placing game upon the table,
but there was so much sitting round it that it would perhaps be hardly
missed (cheers and laughter).  The sports of the ring had, in his
opinion, tended to that contempt of pain and of danger which had
contributed so much in the past to the safety of the country, and which
might, if what he heard was true, be very quickly needed once more.  If
an enemy landed upon our shores it was then that, with our small army, we
should be forced to fall back upon native valour trained into hardihood
by the practice and contemplation of manly sports.  In time of peace also
the rules of the ring had been of service in enforcing the principles of
fair play, and in turning public opinion against that use of the knife or
of the boot which was so common in foreign countries.  He begged,
therefore, to drink �Success to the Fancy,� coupled with the name of John
Jackson, who might stand as a type of all that was most admirable in
British boxing.

Jackson having replied with a readiness which many a public man might
have envied, my uncle rose once more.

�We are here to-night,� said he, �not only to celebrate the past glories
of the prize ring, but also to arrange some sport for the future.  It
should be easy, now that backers and fighting men are gathered together
under one roof, to come to terms with each other.  I have myself set an
example by making a match with Sir Lothian Hume, the terms of which will
be communicated to you by that gentleman.�

Sir Lothian rose with a paper in his hand.

�The terms, your Royal Highness and gentlemen, are briefly these,� said
he.  �My man, Crab Wilson, of Gloucester, having never yet fought a prize
battle, is prepared to meet, upon May the 18th of this year, any man of
any weight who may be selected by Sir Charles Tregellis.  Sir Charles
Tregellis�s selection is limited to men below twenty or above thirty-five
years of age, so as to exclude Belcher and the other candidates for
championship honours.  The stakes are two thousand pounds against a
thousand, two hundred to be paid by the winner to his man; play or pay.�

It was curious to see the intense gravity of them all, fighters and
backers, as they bent their brows and weighed the conditions of the
match.

�I am informed,� said Sir John Lade, �that Crab Wilson�s age is
twenty-three, and that, although he has never fought a regular P.R.
battle, he has none the less fought within ropes for a stake on many
occasions.�

�I�ve seen him half a dozen times at the least,� said Belcher.

�It is precisely for that reason, Sir John, that I am laying odds of two
to one in his favour.�

�May I ask,� said the Prince, �what the exact height and weight of Wilson
may be?�

�Five foot eleven and thirteen-ten, your Royal Highness.�

�Long enough and heavy enough for anything on two legs,� said Jackson,
and the professionals all murmured their assent.

�Read the rules of the fight, Sir Lothian.�

�The battle to take place on Tuesday, May the 18th, at the hour of ten in
the morning, at a spot to be afterwards named.  The ring to be twenty
foot square.  Neither to fall without a knock-down blow, subject to the
decision of the umpires.  Three umpires to be chosen upon the ground,
namely, two in ordinary and one in reference.  Does that meet your
wishes, Sir Charles?�

My uncle bowed.

�Have you anything to say, Wilson?�

The young pugilist, who had a curious, lanky figure, and a craggy, bony
face, passed his fingers through his close-cropped hair.

�If you please, zir,� said he, with a slight west-country burr, �a
twenty-voot ring is too small for a thirteen-stone man.�

There was another murmur of professional agreement.

�What would you have it, Wilson?�

�Vour-an�-twenty, Sir Lothian.�

�Have you any objection, Sir Charles?�

�Not the slightest.�

�Anything else, Wilson?�

�If you please, zir, I�d like to know whom I�m vighting with.�

�I understand that you have not publicly nominated your man, Sir
Charles?�

�I do not intend to do so until the very morning of the fight.  I believe
I have that right within the terms of our wager.�

�Certainly, if you choose to exercise it.�

�I do so intend.  And I should be vastly pleased if Mr. Berkeley Craven
will consent to be stake-holder.�

That gentleman having willingly given his consent, the final formalities
which led up to these humble tournaments were concluded.

And then, as these full-blooded, powerful men became heated with their
wine, angry eyes began to glare across the table, and amid the grey
swirls of tobacco-smoke the lamp-light gleamed upon the fierce, hawk-like
Jews, and the flushed, savage Saxons.  The old quarrel as to whether
Jackson had or had not committed a foul by seizing Mendoza by the hair on
the occasion of their battle at Hornchurch, eight years before, came to
the front once more.  Dutch Sam hurled a shilling down upon the table,
and offered to fight the Pride of Westminster for it if he ventured to
say that Mendoza had been fairly beaten.  Joe Berks, who had grown
noisier and more quarrelsome as the evening went on, tried to clamber
across the table, with horrible blasphemies, to come to blows with an old
Jew named Fighting Yussef, who had plunged into the discussion.  It
needed very little more to finish the supper by a general and ferocious
battle, and it was only the exertions of Jackson, Belcher, Harrison, and
others of the cooler and steadier men, which saved us from a riot.

And then, when at last this question was set aside, that of the rival
claims to championships at different weights came on in its stead, and
again angry words flew about and challenges were in the air.  There was
no exact limit between the light, middle, and heavyweights, and yet it
would make a very great difference to the standing of a boxer whether he
should be regarded as the heaviest of the light-weights, or the lightest
of the heavy-weights.  One claimed to be ten-stone champion, another was
ready to take on anything at eleven, but would not run to twelve, which
would have brought the invincible Jem Belcher down upon him.  Faulkner
claimed to be champion of the seniors, and even old Buckhorse�s curious
call rang out above the tumult as he turned the whole company to laughter
and good humour again by challenging anything over eighty and under seven
stone.

But in spite of gleams of sunshine, there was thunder in the air, and
Champion Harrison had just whispered in my ear that he was quite sure
that we should never get through the night without trouble, and was
advising me, if it got very bad, to take refuge under the table, when the
landlord entered the room hurriedly and handed a note to my uncle.

He read it, and then passed it to the Prince, who returned it with raised
eyebrows and a gesture of surprise.  Then my uncle rose with the scrap of
paper in his hand and a smile upon his lips.

�Gentlemen,� said he, �there is a stranger waiting below who desires a
fight to a finish with the best men in the room.�




CHAPTER XI.
THE FIGHT IN THE COACH-HOUSE.


THE curt announcement was followed by a moment of silent surprise, and
then by a general shout of laughter.  There might be argument as to who
was champion at each weight; but there could be no question that all the
champions of all the weights were seated round the tables.  An audacious
challenge which embraced them one and all, without regard to size or age,
could hardly be regarded otherwise than as a joke�but it was a joke which
might be a dear one for the joker.

�Is this genuine?� asked my uncle.

�Yes, Sir Charles,� answered the landlord; �the man is waiting below.�

�It�s a kid!� cried several of the fighting-men.  �Some cove is a
gammonin� us.�

�Don�t you believe it,� answered the landlord.  �He�s a real slap-up
Corinthian, by his dress; and he means what he says, or else I ain�t no
judge of a man.�

My uncle whispered for a few moments with the Prince of Wales.  �Well,
gentlemen,� said he, at last, �the night is still young, and if any of
you should wish to show the company a little of your skill, you could not
ask a better opportunity.�

�What weight is he, Bill?� asked Jem Belcher.

�He�s close on six foot, and I should put him well into the thirteen
stones when he�s buffed.�

�Heavy metal!� cried Jackson.  �Who takes him on?�

They all wanted to, from nine-stone Dutch Sam upwards.  The air was
filled with their hoarse shouts and their arguments why each should be
the chosen one.  To fight when they were flushed with wine and ripe for
mischief�above all, to fight before so select a company with the Prince
at the ringside, was a chance which did not often come in their way.
Only Jackson, Belcher, Mendoza, and one or two others of the senior and
more famous men remained silent, thinking it beneath their dignity that
they should condescend to so irregular a bye-battle.

�Well, you can�t all fight him,� remarked Jackson, when the babel had
died away.  �It�s for the chairman to choose.�

�Perhaps your Royal Highness has a preference,� said my uncle.

�By Jove, I�d take him on myself if my position was different,� said the
Prince, whose face was growing redder and his eyes more glazed.  �You�ve
seen me with the mufflers, Jackson!  You know my form!�

�I�ve seen your Royal Highness, and I have felt your Royal Highness,�
said the courtly Jackson.

�Perhaps Jem Belcher would give us an exhibition,� said my uncle.

Belcher smiled and shook his handsome head.

�There�s my brother Tom here has never been blooded in London yet, sir.
He might make a fairer match of it.�

�Give him over to me!� roared Joe Berks.  �I�ve been waitin� for a turn
all evenin�, an� I�ll fight any man that tries to take my place.  �E�s my
meat, my masters.  Leave �im to me if you want to see �ow a calf�s �ead
should be dressed.  If you put Tom Belcher before me I�ll fight Tom
Belcher, an� for that matter I�ll fight Jem Belcher, or Bill Belcher, or
any other Belcher that ever came out of Bristol.�

It was clear that Berks had got to the stage when he must fight some one.
His heavy face was gorged and the veins stood out on his low forehead,
while his fierce grey eyes looked viciously from man to man in quest of a
quarrel.  His great red hands were bunched into huge, gnarled fists, and
he shook one of them menacingly as his drunken gaze swept round the
tables.

�I think you�ll agree with me, gentlemen, that Joe Berks would be all the
better for some fresh air and exercise,� said my uncle.  �With the
concurrence of His Royal Highness and of the company, I shall select him
as our champion on this occasion.�

�You do me proud,� cried the fellow, staggering to his feet and pulling
at his coat.  �If I don�t glut him within the five minutes, may I never
see Shropshire again.�

�Wait a bit, Berks,� cried several of the amateurs.  �Where�s it going to
be held?�

�Where you like, masters.  I�ll fight him in a sawpit, or on the outside
of a coach if it please you.  Put us toe to toe, and leave the rest with
me.�

�They can�t fight here with all this litter,� said my uncle.  �Where
shall it be?�

��Pon my soul, Tregellis,� cried the Prince, �I think our unknown friend
might have a word to say upon that matter.  He�ll be vastly ill-used if
you don�t let him have his own choice of conditions.�

�You are right, sir.  We must have him up.�

�That�s easy enough,� said the landlord, �for here he comes through the
doorway.�

I glanced round and had a side view of a tall and well-dressed young man
in a long, brown travelling coat and a black felt hat.  The next instant
he had turned and I had clutched with both my hands on to Champion
Harrison�s arm.

�Harrison!� I gasped.  �It�s Boy Jim!�

And yet somehow the possibility and even the probability of it had
occurred to me from the beginning, and I believe that it had to Harrison
also, for I had noticed that his face grew grave and troubled from the
very moment that there was talk of the stranger below.  Now, the instant
that the buzz of surprise and admiration caused by Jim�s face and figure
had died away, Harrison was on his feet, gesticulating in his excitement.

�It�s my nephew Jim, gentlemen,� he cried.  �He�s not twenty yet, and
it�s no doing of mine that he should be here.�

�Let him alone, Harrison,� cried Jackson.  �He�s big enough to take care
of himself.�

�This matter has gone rather far,� said my uncle.  �I think, Harrison,
that you are too good a sportsman to prevent your nephew from showing
whether he takes after his uncle.�

�It�s very different from me,� cried Harrison, in great distress.  �But
I�ll tell you what I�ll do, gentlemen.  I never thought to stand up in a
ring again, but I�ll take on Joe Berks with pleasure, just to give a bit
o� sport to this company.�

Boy Jim stepped across and laid his hand upon the prize-fighter�s
shoulder.

�It must be so, uncle,� I heard him whisper.  �I am sorry to go against
your wishes, but I have made up my mind, and I must carry it through.�

Harrison shrugged his huge shoulders.

�Jim, Jim, you don�t know what you are doing!  But I�ve heard you speak
like that before, boy, and I know that it ends in your getting your way.�

�I trust, Harrison, that your opposition is withdrawn?� said my uncle.

�Can I not take his place?�

�You would not have it said that I gave a challenge and let another carry
it out?� whispered Jim.  �This is my one chance.  For Heaven�s sake don�t
stand in my way.�

The smith�s broad and usually stolid face was all working with his
conflicting emotions.  At last he banged his fist down upon the table.

�It�s no fault of mine!� he cried.  �It was to be and it is.  Jim, boy,
for the Lord�s sake remember your distances, and stick to out-fightin�
with a man that could give you a stone.�

�I was sure that Harrison would not stand in the way of sport,� said my
uncle.  �We are glad that you have stepped up, that we might consult you
as to the arrangements for giving effect to your very sporting
challenge.�

�Whom am I to fight?� asked Jim, looking round at the company, who were
now all upon their feet.

�Young man, you�ll know enough of who you �ave to fight before you are
through with it,� cried Berks, lurching heavily through the crowd.
�You�ll need a friend to swear to you before I�ve finished, d�ye see?�

Jim looked at him with disgust in every line of his face.

�Surely you are not going to set me to fight a drunken man!� said he.
�Where is Jem Belcher?�

�My name, young man.�

�I should be glad to try you, if I may.�

�You must work up to me, my lad.  You don�t take a ladder at one jump,
but you do it rung by rung.  Show yourself to be a match for me, and I�ll
give you a turn.�

�I�m much obliged to you.�

�And I like the look of you, and wish you well,� said Belcher, holding
out his hand.  They were not unlike each other, either in face or figure,
though the Bristol man was a few years the older, and a murmur of
critical admiration was heard as the two tall, lithe figures, and keen,
clean-cut faces were contrasted.

�Have you any choice where the fight takes place?� asked my uncle.

�I am in your hands, sir,� said Jim.

�Why not go round to the Five�s Court?� suggested Sir John Lade.

�Yes, let us go to the Five�s Court.�

But this did not at all suit the views of the landlord, who saw in this
lucky incident a chance of reaping a fresh harvest from his spendthrift
company.

�If it please you,� he cried, �there is no need to go so far.  My
coach-house at the back of the yard is empty, and a better place for a
mill you�ll never find.�

There was a general shout in favour of the coach-house, and those who
were nearest the door began to slip through, in the hope of scouring the
best places.  My stout neighbour, Bill Warr, pulled Harrison to one side.

�I�d stop it if I were you,� he whispered.

�I would if I could.  It�s no wish of mine that he should fight.  But
there�s no turning him when once his mind is made up.�  All his own
fights put together had never reduced the pugilist to such a state of
agitation.

�Wait on �im yourself, then, and chuck up the sponge when things begin to
go wrong.  You know Joe Berks�s record?�

�He�s since my time.�

�Well, �e�s a terror, that�s all.  It�s only Belcher that can master �im.
You see the man for yourself, six foot, fourteen stone, and full of the
devil.  Belcher�s beat �im twice, but the second time �e �ad all �is work
to do it.�

�Well, well, we�ve got to go through with it.  You�ve not seen Boy Jim
put his mawleys up, or maybe you�d think better of his chances.  When he
was short of sixteen he licked the Cock of the South Downs, and he�s come
on a long way since then.�

The company was swarming through the door and clattering down the stair,
so we followed in the stream.  A fine rain was falling, and the yellow
lights from the windows glistened upon the wet cobblestones of the yard.
How welcome was that breath of sweet, damp air after the fetid atmosphere
of the supper-room.  At the other end of the yard was an open door
sharply outlined by the gleam of lanterns within, and through this they
poured, amateurs and fighting-men jostling each other in their eagerness
to get to the front.  For my own part, being a smallish man, I should
have seen nothing had I not found an upturned bucket in a corner, upon
which I perched myself with the wall at my back.

It was a large room with a wooden floor and an open square in the
ceiling, which was fringed with the heads of the ostlers and stable boys
who were looking down from the harness-room above.  A carriage-lamp was
slung in each corner, and a very large stable-lantern hung from a rafter
in the centre.  A coil of rope had been brought in, and under the
direction of Jackson four men had been stationed to hold it.

�What space do you give them?� asked my uncle.

�Twenty-four, as they are both big ones, sir.�

�Very good, and half-minutes between rounds, I suppose?  I�ll umpire if
Sir Lothian Hume will do the same, and you can hold the watch and
referee, Jackson.�

With great speed and exactness every preparation was rapidly made by
these experienced men.  Mendoza and Dutch Sam were commissioned to attend
to Berks, while Belcher and Jack Harrison did the same for Boy Jim.
Sponges, towels, and some brandy in a bladder were passed over the heads
of the crowd for the use of the seconds.

�Here�s our man,� cried Belcher.  �Come along, Berks, or we�ll go to
fetch you.�

Jim appeared in the ring stripped to the waist, with a coloured
handkerchief tied round his middle.  A shout of admiration came from the
spectators as they looked upon the fine lines of his figure, and I found
myself roaring with the rest.  His shoulders were sloping rather than
bulky, and his chest was deep rather than broad, but the muscle was all
in the right place, rippling down in long, low curves from neck to
shoulder, and from shoulder to elbow.  His work at the anvil had
developed his arms to their utmost, and his healthy country living gave a
sleek gloss to his ivory skin, which shone in the lamplight.  His
expression was full of spirit and confidence, and he wore a grim sort of
half-smile which I had seen many a time in our boyhood, and which meant,
I knew, that his pride had set iron hard, and that his senses would fail
him long before his courage.

Joe Berks in the meanwhile had swaggered in and stood with folded arms
between his seconds in the opposite corner.  His face had none of the
eager alertness of his opponent, and his skin, of a dead white, with
heavy folds about the chest and ribs, showed, even to my inexperienced
eyes, that he was not a man who should fight without training.  A life of
toping and ease had left him flabby and gross.  On the other hand, he was
famous for his mettle and for his hitting power, so that, even in the
face of the advantages of youth and condition, the betting was three to
one in his favour.  His heavy-jowled, clean-shaven face expressed
ferocity as well as courage, and he stood with his small, blood-shot eyes
fixed viciously upon Jim, and his lumpy shoulders stooping a little
forwards, like a fierce hound training on a leash.

The hubbub of the betting had risen until it drowned all other sounds,
men shouting their opinions from one side of the coach-house to the
other, and waving their hands to attract attention, or as a sign that
they had accepted a wager.  Sir John Lade, standing just in front of me,
was roaring out the odds against Jim, and laying them freely with those
who fancied the appearance of the unknown.

�I�ve seen Berks fight,� said he to the Honourable Berkeley Craven.  �No
country hawbuck is going to knock out a man with such a record.�

�He may be a country hawbuck,� the other answered, �but I have been
reckoned a judge of anything either on two legs or four, and I tell you,
Sir John, that I never saw a man who looked better bred in my life.  Are
you still laying against him?�

�Three to one.�

�Have you once in hundreds.�

�Very good, Craven!  There they go!  Berks!  Berks!  Bravo!  Berks!
Bravo!  I think, Craven, that I shall trouble you for that hundred.�

The two men had stood up to each other, Jim as light upon his feet as a
goat, with his left well out and his right thrown across the lower part
of his chest, while Berks held both arms half extended and his feet
almost level, so that he might lead off with either side.  For an instant
they looked each other over, and then Berks, ducking his head and rushing
in with a handover-hand style of hitting, bored Jim down into his corner.
It was a backward slip rather than a knockdown, but a thin trickle of
blood was seen at the corner of Jim�s mouth.  In an instant the seconds
had seized their men and carried them back into their corners.

�Do you mind doubling our bet?� said Berkeley Craven, who was craning his
neck to get a glimpse of Jim.

�Four to one on Berks!  Four to one on Berks!� cried the ringsiders.

�The odds have gone up, you see.  Will you have four to one in hundreds?�

�Very good, Sir John.�

�You seem to fancy him more for having been knocked down.�

�He was pushed down, but he stopped every blow, and I liked the look on
his face as he got up again.�

�Well, it�s the old stager for me.  Here they come again!  He�s got a
pretty style, and he covers his points well, but it isn�t the best
looking that wins.�

They were at it again, and I was jumping about upon my bucket in my
excitement.  It was evident that Berks meant to finish the battle
off-hand, whilst Jim, with two of the most experienced men in England to
advise him, was quite aware that his correct tactics were to allow the
ruffian to expend his strength and wind in vain.  There was something
horrible in the ferocious energy of Berks�s hitting, every blow fetching
a grunt from him as he smashed it in, and after each I gazed at Jim, as I
have gazed at a stranded vessel upon the Sussex beach when wave after
wave has roared over it, fearing each time that I should find it
miserably mangled.  But still the lamplight shone upon the lad�s clear,
alert face, upon his well-opened eyes and his firm-set mouth, while the
blows were taken upon his forearm or allowed, by a quick duck of the
head, to whistle over his shoulder.  But Berks was artful as well as
violent.  Gradually he worked Jim back into an angle of the ropes from
which there was no escape, and then, when he had him fairly penned, he
sprang upon him like a tiger.  What happened was so quick that I cannot
set its sequence down in words, but I saw Jim make a quick stoop under
the swinging arms, and at the same instant I heard a sharp, ringing
smack, and there was Jim dancing about in the middle of the ring, and
Berks lying upon his side on the floor, with his hand to his eye.

How they roared!  Prize-fighters, Corinthians, Prince, stable-boy, and
landlord were all shouting at the top of their lungs.  Old Buckhorse was
skipping about on a box beside me, shrieking out criticisms and advice in
strange, obsolete ring-jargon, which no one could understand.  His dull
eyes were shining, his parchment face was quivering with excitement, and
his strange musical call rang out above all the hubbub.  The two men were
hurried to their corners, one second sponging them down and the other
flapping a towel in front of their face; whilst they, with arms hanging
down and legs extended, tried to draw all the air they could into their
lungs in the brief space allowed them.

�Where�s your country hawbuck now?� cried Craven, triumphantly.  �Did
ever you witness anything more masterly?�

�He�s no Johnny Raw, certainly,� said Sir John, shaking his head.  �What
odds are you giving on Berks, Lord Sole?�

�Two to one.�

�I take you twice in hundreds.�

�Here�s Sir John Lade hedging!� cried my uncle, smiling back at us over
his shoulder.

�Time!� said Jackson, and the two men sprang forward to the mark again.

This round was a good deal shorter than that which had preceded it.
Berks�s orders evidently were to close at any cost, and so make use of
his extra weight and strength before the superior condition of his
antagonist could have time to tell.  On the other hand, Jim, after his
experience in the last round, was less disposed to make any great
exertion to keep him at arms� length.  He led at Berks�s head, as he came
rushing in, and missed him, receiving a severe body blow in return, which
left the imprint of four angry knuckles above his ribs.  As they closed
Jim caught his opponent�s bullet head under his arm for an instant, and
put a couple of half-arm blows in; but the prize-fighter pulled him over
by his weight, and the two fell panting side by side upon the ground.
Jim sprang up, however, and walked over to his corner, while Berks,
distressed by his evening�s dissipation, leaned one arm upon Mendoza and
the other upon Dutch Sam as he made for his seat.

�Bellows to mend!� cried Jem Belcher.  �Where�s the four to one now?�

�Give us time to get the lid off our pepper-box,� said Mendoza.  �We mean
to make a night of it.�

�Looks like it,� said Jack Harrison.  �He�s shut one of his eyes already.
Even money that my boy wins it!�

�How much?� asked several voices.

�Two pound four and threepence,� cried Harrison, counting out all his
worldly wealth.

�Time!� said Jackson once more.

They were both at the mark in an instant, Jim as full of sprightly
confidence as ever, and Berks with a fixed grin upon his bull-dog face
and a most vicious gleam in the only eye which was of use to him.  His
half-minute had not enabled him to recover his breath, and his huge,
hairy chest was rising and falling with a quick, loud panting like a
spent hound.  �Go in, boy!  Bustle him!� roared Harrison and Belcher.
�Get your wind, Joe; get your wind!� cried the Jews.  So now we had a
reversal of tactics, for it was Jim who went in to hit with all the
vigour of his young strength and unimpaired energy, while it was the
savage Berks who was paying his debt to Nature for the many injuries
which he had done her.  He gasped, he gurgled, his face grew purple in
his attempts to get his breath, while with his long left arm extended and
his right thrown across, he tried to screen himself from the attack of
his wiry antagonist.  �Drop when he hits!� cried Mendoza.  �Drop and have
a rest!�

But there was no shyness or shiftiness about Berks�s fighting.  He was
always a gallant ruffian, who disdained to go down before an antagonist
as long as his legs would sustain him.  He propped Jim off with his long
arm, and though the lad sprang lightly round him looking for an opening,
he was held off as if a forty-inch bar of iron were between them.  Every
instant now was in favour of Berks, and already his breathing was easier
and the bluish tinge fading from his face.  Jim knew that his chance of a
speedy victory was slipping away from him, and he came back again and
again as swift as a flash to the attack without being able to get past
the passive defence of the trained fighting-man.  It was at such a moment
that ringcraft was needed, and luckily for Jim two masters of it were at
his back.

�Get your left on his mark, boy,� they shouted, �then go to his head with
the right.�

Jim heard and acted on the instant.  Plunk! came his left just where his
antagonist�s ribs curved from his breast-bone.  The force of the blow was
half broken by Berks�s elbow, but it served its purpose of bringing
forward his head.  Spank! went the right, with the clear, crisp sound of
two billiard balls clapping together, and Berks reeled, flung up his
arms, spun round, and fell in a huge, fleshy heap upon the floor.  His
seconds were on him instantly, and propped him up in a sitting position,
his head rolling helplessly from one shoulder to the other, and finally
toppling backwards with his chin pointed to the ceiling.  Dutch Sam
thrust the brandy-bladder between his teeth, while Mendoza shook him
savagely and howled insults in his ear, but neither the spirits nor the
sense of injury could break into that serene insensibility.  �Time!� was
duly called, and the Jews, seeing that the affair was over, let their
man�s head fall back with a crack upon the floor, and there he lay, his
huge arms and legs asprawl, whilst the Corinthians and fighting-men
crowded past him to shake the hand of his conqueror.

For my part, I tried also to press through the throng, but it was no easy
task for one of the smallest and weakest men in the room.  On all sides
of me I heard a brisk discussion from amateurs and professionals of Jim�s
performance and of his prospects.

�He�s the best bit of new stuff that I�ve seen since Jem Belcher fought
his first fight with Paddington Jones at Wormwood Scrubbs four years ago
last April,� said Berkeley Craven.  �You�ll see him with the belt round
his waist before he�s five-and-twenty, or I am no judge of a man.�

�That handsome face of his has cost me a cool five hundred,� grumbled Sir
John Lade.  �Who�d have thought he was such a punishing hitter?�

�For all that,� said another, �I am confident that if Joe Berks had been
sober he would have eaten him.  Besides, the lad was in training, and the
other would burst like an overdone potato if he were hit.  I never saw a
man so soft, or with his wind in such condition.  Put the men in
training, and it�s a horse to a hen on the bruiser.�

Some agreed with the last speaker and some were against him, so that a
brisk argument was being carried on around me.  In the midst of it the
Prince took his departure, which was the signal for the greater part of
the company to make for the door.  In this way I was able at last to
reach the corner where Jim had just finished his dressing, while Champion
Harrison, with tears of joy still shining upon his cheeks, was helping
him on with his overcoat.

�In four rounds!� he kept repeating in a sort of an ecstasy.  �Joe Berks
in four rounds!  And it took Jem Belcher fourteen!�

�Well, Roddy,� cried Jim, holding out his hand, �I told you that I would
come to London and make my name known.�

�It was splendid, Jim!�

�Dear old Roddy!  I saw your white face staring at me from the corner.
You are not changed, for all your grand clothes and your London friends.�

�It is you who are changed, Jim,� said I; �I hardly knew you when you
came into the room.�

�Nor I,� cried the smith.  �Where got you all these fine feathers, Jim?
Sure I am that it was not your aunt who helped you to the first step
towards the prize-ring.�

�Miss Hinton has been my friend�the best friend I ever had.�

�Humph!  I thought as much,� grumbled the smith.  �Well, it is no doing
of mine, Jim, and you must bear witness to that when we go home again.  I
don�t know what�but, there, it is done, and it can�t be helped.  After
all, she�s�Now, the deuce take my clumsy tongue!�

I could not tell whether it was the wine which he had taken at supper or
the excitement of Boy Jim�s victory which was affecting Harrison, but his
usually placid face wore a most disturbed expression, and his manner
seemed to betray an alternation of exultation and embarrassment.  Jim
looked curiously at him, wondering evidently what it was that lay behind
these abrupt sentences and sudden silences.  The coach-house had in the
mean time been cleared; Berks with many curses had staggered at last to
his feet, and had gone off in company with two other bruisers, while Jem
Belcher alone remained chatting very earnestly with my uncle.

�Very good, Belcher,� I heard my uncle say.

�It would be a real pleasure to me to do it, sir,� and the famous
prize-fighter, as the two walked towards us.

�I wished to ask you, Jim Harrison, whether you would undertake to be my
champion in the fight against Crab Wilson of Gloucester?� said my uncle.

�That is what I want, Sir Charles�to have a chance of fighting my way
upwards.�

�There are heavy stakes upon the event�very heavy stakes,� said my uncle.
�You will receive two hundred pounds, if you win.  Does that satisfy
you?�

�I shall fight for the honour, and because I wish to be thought worthy of
being matched against Jem Belcher.�

Belcher laughed good-humouredly.

�You are going the right way about it, lad,� said he.  �But you had a
soft thing on to-night with a drunken man who was out of condition.�

�I did not wish to fight him,� said Jim, flushing.

�Oh, I know you have spirit enough to fight anything on two legs.  I knew
that the instant I clapped eyes on you; but I want you to remember that
when you fight Crab Wilson, you will fight the most promising man from
the west, and that the best man of the west is likely to be the best man
in England.  He�s as quick and as long in the reach as you are, and he�ll
train himself to the last half-ounce of tallow.  I tell you this now,
d�ye see, because if I�m to have the charge of you��

�Charge of me!�

�Yes,� said my uncle.  �Belcher has consented to train you for the coming
battle if you are willing to enter.�

�I am sure I am very much obliged to you,� cried Jim, heartily.  �Unless
my uncle should wish to train me, there is no one I would rather have.�

�Nay, Jim; I�ll stay with you a few days, but Belcher knows a deal more
about training than I do.  Where will the quarters be?�

�I thought it would be handy for you if we fixed it at the George, at
Crawley.  Then, if we have choice of place, we might choose Crawley Down,
for, except Molesey Hurst, and, maybe, Smitham Bottom, there isn�t a spot
in the country that would compare with it for a mill.  Do you agree with
that?�

�With all my heart,� said Jim.

�Then you�re my man from this hour on, d�ye see?� said Belcher.  �Your
food is mine, and your drink is mine, and your sleep is mine, and all
you�ve to do is just what you are told.  We haven�t an hour to lose, for
Wilson has been in half-training this month back.  You saw his empty
glass to-night.�

�Jim�s fit to fight for his life at the present moment,� said Harrison.
�But we�ll both come down to Crawley to-morrow.  So good night, Sir
Charles.�

�Good night, Roddy,� said Jim.  �You�ll come down to Crawley and see me
at my training quarters, will you not?�

And I heartily promised that I would.

�You must be more careful, nephew,� said my uncle, as we rattled home in
his model _vis-�-vis_.  �_En premi�re jeunesse_ one is a little inclined
to be ruled by one�s heart rather than by one�s reason.  Jim Harrison
seems to be a most respectable young fellow, but after all he is a
blacksmith�s apprentice, and a candidate for the prize-ring.  There is a
vast gap between his position and that of my own blood relation, and you
must let him feel that you are his superior.�

�He is the oldest and dearest friend that I have in the world, sir,� I
answered.  �We were boys together, and have never had a secret from each
other.  As to showing him that I am his superior, I don�t know how I can
do that, for I know very well that he is mine.�

�Hum!� said my uncle, drily, and it was the last word that he addressed
to me that night.




CHAPTER XII.
THE COFFEE-ROOM OF FLADONG�S.


SO Boy Jim went down to the George, at Crawley, under the charge of Jim
Belcher and Champion Harrison, to train for his great fight with Crab
Wilson, of Gloucester, whilst every club and bar parlour of London rang
with the account of how he had appeared at a supper of Corinthians, and
beaten the formidable Joe Berks in four rounds.  I remembered that
afternoon at Friar�s Oak when Jim had told me that he would make his name
known, and his words had come true sooner than he could have expected it,
for, go where one might, one heard of nothing but the match between Sir
Lothian Hume and Sir Charles Tregellis, and the points of the two
probable combatants.  The betting was still steadily in favour of Wilson,
for he had a number of bye-battles to set against this single victory of
Jim�s, and it was thought by connoisseurs who had seen him spar that the
singular defensive tactics which had given him his nickname would prove
very puzzling to a raw antagonist.  In height, strength, and reputation
for gameness there was very little to choose between them, but Wilson had
been the more severely tested.

It was but a few days before the battle that my father made his promised
visit to London.  The seaman had no love of cities, and was happier
wandering over the Downs, and turning his glass upon every topsail which
showed above the horizon, than when finding his way among crowded
streets, where, as he complained, it was impossible to keep a course by
the sun, and hard enough by dead reckoning.  Rumours of war were in the
air, however, and it was necessary that he should use his influence with
Lord Nelson if a vacancy were to be found either for himself or for me.

My uncle had just set forth, as was his custom of an evening, clad in his
green riding-frock, his plate buttons, his Cordovan boots, and his round
hat, to show himself upon his crop-tailed tit in the Mall.  I had
remained behind, for, indeed, I had already made up my mind that I had no
calling for this fashionable life.  These men, with their small waists,
their gestures, and their unnatural ways, had become wearisome to me, and
even my uncle, with his cold and patronizing manner, filled me with very
mixed feelings.  My thoughts were back in Sussex, and I was dreaming of
the kindly, simple ways of the country, when there came a rat-tat at the
knocker, the ring of a hearty voice, and there, in the doorway, was the
smiling, weather-beaten face, with the puckered eyelids and the light
blue eyes.

�Why, Roddy, you are grand indeed!� he cried.  �But I had rather see you
with the King�s blue coat upon your back than with all these frills and
ruffles.�

�And I had rather wear it, father.�

�It warms my heart to hear you say so.  Lord Nelson has promised me that
he would find a berth for you, and to-morrow we shall seek him out and
remind him of it.  But where is your uncle?�

�He is riding in the Mall.�

A look of relief passed over my father�s honest face, for he was never
very easy in his brother-in-law�s company.  �I have been to the
Admiralty,� said he, �and I trust that I shall have a ship when war
breaks out; by all accounts it will not be long first.  Lord St. Vincent
told me so with his own lips.  But I am at Fladong�s, Rodney, where, if
you will come and sup with me, you will see some of my messmates from the
Mediterranean.�

When you think that in the last year of the war we had 140,000 seamen and
mariners afloat, commanded by 4000 officers, and that half of these had
been turned adrift when the Peace of Amiens laid their ships up in the
Hamoaze or Portsdown creek, you will understand that London, as well as
the dockyard towns, was full of seafarers.  You could not walk the
streets without catching sight of the gipsy-faced, keen-eyed men whose
plain clothes told of their thin purses as plainly as their listless air
showed their weariness of a life of forced and unaccustomed inaction.
Amid the dark streets and brick houses there was something out of place
in their appearance, as when the sea-gulls, driven by stress of weather,
are seen in the Midland shires.  Yet while prize-courts procrastinated,
or there was a chance of an appointment by showing their sunburned faces
at the Admiralty, so long they would continue to pace with their
quarter-deck strut down Whitehall, or to gather of an evening to discuss
the events of the last war or the chances of the next at Fladong�s, in
Oxford Street, which was reserved as entirely for the Navy as Slaughter�s
was for the Army, or Ibbetson�s for the Church of England.

It did not surprise me, therefore, that we should find the large room in
which we supped crowded with naval men, but I remember that what did
cause me some astonishment was to observe that all these sailors, who had
served under the most varying conditions in all quarters of the globe,
from the Baltic to the East Indies, should have been moulded into so
uniform a type that they were more like each other than brother is
commonly to brother.  The rules of the service insured that every face
should be clean-shaven, every head powdered, and every neck covered by
the little queue of natural hair tied with a black silk ribbon.  Biting
winds and tropical suns had combined to darken them, whilst the habit of
command and the menace of ever-recurring dangers had stamped them all
with the same expression of authority and of alertness.  There were some
jovial faces amongst them, but the older officers, with their deep-lined
cheeks and their masterful noses, were, for the most part, as austere as
so many weather-beaten ascetics from the desert.  Lonely watches, and a
discipline which cut them off from all companionship, had left their mark
upon those Red Indian faces.  For my part, I could hardly eat my supper
for watching them.  Young as I was, I knew that if there were any freedom
left in Europe it was to these men that we owed it; and I seemed to read
upon their grim, harsh features the record of that long ten years of
struggle which had swept the tricolour from the seas.

When we had finished our supper, my father led me into the great
coffee-room, where a hundred or more officers may have been assembled,
drinking their wine and smoking their long clay pipes, until the air was
as thick as the main-deck in a close-fought action.  As we entered we
found ourselves face to face with an elderly officer who was coming out.
He was a man with large, thoughtful eyes, and a full, placid face�such a
face as one would expect from a philosopher and a philanthropist, rather
than from a fighting seaman.

�Here�s Cuddie Collingwood,� whispered my father.

�Halloa, Lieutenant Stone!� cried the famous admiral very cheerily.  �I
have scarce caught a glimpse of you since you came aboard the _Excellent_
after St. Vincent.  You had the luck to be at the Nile also, I
understand?�

�I was third of the _Theseus_, under Millar, sir.�

�It nearly broke my heart to have missed it.  I have not yet outlived it.
To think of such a gallant service, and I engaged in harassing the
market-boats, the miserable cabbage-carriers of St. Luccars!�

�Your plight was better than mine, Sir Cuthbert,� said a voice from
behind us, and a large man in the full uniform of a post-captain took a
step forward to include himself in our circle.  His mastiff face was
heavy with emotion, and he shook his head miserably as he spoke.

�Yes, yes, Troubridge, I can understand and sympathize with your
feelings.�

�I passed through torment that night, Collingwood.  It left a mark on me
that I shall never lose until I go over the ship�s side in a canvas
cover.  To have my beautiful _Culloden_ laid on a sandbank just out of
gunshot.  To hear and see the fight the whole night through, and never to
pull a lanyard or take the tompions out of my guns.  Twice I opened my
pistol-case to blow out my brains, and it was but the thought that Nelson
might have a use for me that held me back.�

Collingwood shook the hand of the unfortunate captain.

�Admiral Nelson was not long in finding a use for you, Troubridge,� said
he.  �We have all heard of your siege of Capua, and how you ran up your
ship�s guns without trenches or parallels, and fired point-blank through
the embrasures.�

The melancholy cleared away from the massive face of the big seaman, and
his deep laughter filled the room.

�I�m not clever enough or slow enough for their Z-Z fashions,� said he.
�We got alongside and slapped it in through their port-holes until they
struck their colours.  But where have you been, Sir Cuthbert?�

�With my wife and my two little lasses at Morpeth in the North Country.
I have but seen them this once in ten years, and it may be ten more, for
all I know, ere I see them again.  I have been doing good work for the
fleet up yonder.�

�I had thought, sir, that it was inland,� said my father.

Collingwood took a little black bag out of his pocket and shook it.

�Inland it is,� said he, �and yet I have done good work for the fleet
there.  What do you suppose I hold in this bag?�

�Bullets,� said Troubridge.

�Something that a sailor needs even more than that,� answered the
admiral, and turning it over he tilted a pile of acorns on to his palm.
�I carry them with me in my country walks, and where I see a fruitful
nook I thrust one deep with the end of my cane.  My oak trees may fight
those rascals over the water when I am long forgotten.  Do you know,
lieutenant, how many oaks go to make an eighty-gun ship?�

My father shook his head.

�Two thousand, no less.  For every two-decked ship that carries the white
ensign there is a grove the less in England.  So how are our grandsons to
beat the French if we do not give them the trees with which to build
their ships?�

He replaced his bag in his pocket, and then, passing his arm through
Troubridge�s, they went through the door together.

�There�s a man whose life might help you to trim your own course,� said
my father, as we took our seats at a vacant table.  �He is ever the same
quiet gentleman, with his thoughts busy for the comfort of his ship�s
company, and his heart with his wife and children whom he has so seldom
seen.  It is said in the fleet that an oath has never passed his lips,
Rodney, though how he managed when he was first lieutenant of a raw crew
is more than I can conceive.  But they all love Cuddie, for they know
he�s an angel to fight.  How d�ye do, Captain Foley?  My respects, Sir
Ed�ard!  Why, if they could but press the company, they would man a
corvette with flag officers.�

�There�s many a man here, Rodney,� continued my father, as he glanced
about him, �whose name may never find its way into any book save his own
ship�s log, but who in his own way has set as fine an example as any
admiral of them all.  We know them, and talk of them in the fleet, though
they may never be bawled in the streets of London.  There�s as much
seamanship and pluck in a good cutter action as in a line-o�-battleship
fight, though you may not come by a title nor the thanks of Parliament
for it.  There�s Hamilton, for example, the quiet, pale-faced man who is
learning against the pillar.  It was he who, with six rowing-boats, cut
out the 44-gun frigate _Hermione_ from under the muzzles of two hundred
shore-guns in the harbour of Puerto Cabello.  No finer action was done in
the whole war.  There�s Jaheel Brenton, with the whiskers.  It was he who
attacked twelve Spanish gunboats in his one little brig, and made four of
them strike to him.  There�s Walker, of the _Rose_ cutter, who, with
thirteen men, engaged three French privateers with crews of a hundred and
forty-six.  He sank one, captured one, and chased the third.  How are
you, Captain Ball?  I hope I see you well?�

Two or three of my father�s acquaintances who had been sitting close by
drew up their chairs to us, and soon quite a circle had formed, all
talking loudly and arguing upon sea matters, shaking their long,
red-tipped pipes at each other as they spoke.  My father whispered in my
ear that his neighbour was Captain Foley, of the _Goliath_, who led the
van at the Nile, and that the tall, thin, foxy-haired man opposite was
Lord Cochrane, the most dashing frigate captain in the Service.  Even at
Friar�s Oak we had heard how, in the little _Speedy_, of fourteen small
guns with fifty-four men, he had carried by boarding the Spanish frigate
_Gamo_ with her crew of three hundred.  It was easy to see that he was a
quick, irascible, high-blooded man, for he was talking hotly about his
grievances with a flush of anger upon his freckled cheeks.

�We shall never do any good upon the ocean until we have hanged the
dockyard contractors,� he cried.  �I�d have a dead dockyard contractor as
a figure-head for every first-rate in the fleet, and a provision dealer
for every frigate.  I know them with their puttied seams and their devil
bolts, risking five hundred lives that they may steal a few pounds� worth
of copper.  What became of the _Chance_, and of the _Martin_, and of the
_Orestes_?  They foundered at sea, and were never heard of more, and I
say that the crews of them were murdered men.�

Lord Cochrane seemed to be expressing the views of all, for a murmur of
assent, with a mutter of hearty, deep-sea curses, ran round the circle.

�Those rascals over yonder manage things better,� said an old one-eyed
captain, with the blue-and-white riband for St. Vincent peeping out of
his third buttonhole.  �They sheer away their heads if they get up to any
foolery.  Did ever a vessel come out of Toulon as my 38-gun frigate did
from Plymouth last year, with her masts rolling about until her shrouds
were like iron bars on one side and hanging in festoons upon the other?
The meanest sloop that ever sailed out of France would have overmatched
her, and then it would be on me, and not on this Devonport bungler, that
a court-martial would be called.�

They loved to grumble, those old salts, for as soon as one had shot off
his grievance his neighbour would follow with another, each more bitter
than the last.

�Look at our sails!� cried Captain Foley.  �Put a French and a British
ship at anchor together, and how can you tell which is which?�

�Frenchy has his fore and maintop-gallant masts about equal,� said my
father.

�In the old ships, maybe, but how many of the new are laid down on the
French model?  No, there�s no way of telling them at anchor.  But let
them hoist sail, and how d�you tell them then?�

�Frenchy has white sails,� cried several.

�And ours are black and rotten.  That�s the difference.  No wonder they
outsail us when the wind can blow through our canvas.�

�In the _Speedy_,� said Cochrane, �the sailcloth was so thin that, when I
made my observation, I always took my meridian through the foretopsail
and my horizon through the foresail.�

There was a general laugh at this, and then at it they all went again,
letting off into speech all those weary broodings and silent troubles
which had rankled during long years of service, for an iron discipline
prevented them from speaking when their feet were upon their own
quarter-decks.  One told of his powder, six pounds of which were needed
to throw a ball a thousand yards.  Another cursed the Admiralty Courts,
where a prize goes in as a full-rigged ship and comes out as a schooner.
The old captain spoke of the promotions by Parliamentary interest which
had put many a youngster into the captain�s cabin when he should have
been in the gun-room.  And then they came back to the difficulty of
finding crews for their vessels, and they all together raised up their
voices and wailed.

�What is the use of building fresh ships,� cried Foley, �when even with a
ten-pound bounty you can�t man the ships that you have got?�

But Lord Cochrane was on the other side in this question.

�You�d have the men, sir, if you treated them well when you got them,�
said he.  �Admiral Nelson can get his ships manned.  So can Admiral
Collingwood.  Why?  Because he has thought for the men, and so the men
have thought for him.  Let men and officers know and respect each other,
and there�s no difficulty in keeping a ship�s company.  It�s the infernal
plan of turning a crew over from ship to ship and leaving the officers
behind that rots the Navy.  But I have never found a difficulty, and I
dare swear that if I hoist my pennant to-morrow I shall have all my old
_Speedies_ back, and as many volunteers as I care to take.�

�That is very well, my lord,� said the old captain, with some warmth;
�when the Jacks hear that the _Speedy_ took fifty vessels in thirteen
months, they are sure to volunteer to serve with her commander.  Every
good cruiser can fill her complement quickly enough.  But it is not the
cruisers that fight the country�s battles and blockade the enemy�s ports.
I say that all prize-money should be divided equally among the whole
fleet, and until you have such a rule, the smartest men will always be
found where they are of least service to any one but themselves.�

This speech produced a chorus of protests from the cruiser officers and a
hearty agreement from the line-of-battleship men, who seemed to be in the
majority in the circle which had gathered round.  From the flushed faces
and angry glances it was evident that the question was one upon which
there was strong feeling upon both sides.

�What the cruiser gets the cruiser earns,� cried a frigate captain.

�Do you mean to say, sir,� said Captain Foley, �that the duties of an
officer upon a cruiser demand more care or higher professional ability
than those of one who is employed upon blockade service, with a lee coast
under him whenever the wind shifts to the west, and the topmasts of an
enemy�s squadron for ever in his sight?�

�I do not claim higher ability, sir.�

�Then why should you claim higher pay?  Can you deny that a seaman before
the mast makes more in a fast frigate than a lieutenant can in a
battleship?�

�It was only last year,� said a very gentlemanly-looking officer, who
might have passed for a buck upon town had his skin not been burned to
copper in such sunshine as never bursts upon London��it was only last
year that I brought the old _Alexander_ back from the Mediterranean,
floating like an empty barrel and carrying nothing but honour for her
cargo.  In the Channel we fell in with the frigate _Minerva_ from the
Western Ocean, with her lee ports under water and her hatches bursting
with the plunder which had been too valuable to trust to the prize crews.
She had ingots of silver along her yards and bowsprit, and a bit of
silver plate at the truck of the masts.  My Jacks could have fired into
her, and would, too, if they had not been held back.  It made them mad to
think of all they had done in the south, and then to see this saucy
frigate flashing her money before their eyes.�

�I cannot see their grievance, Captain Ball,� said Cochrane.

�When you are promoted to a two-decker, my lord, it will possibly become
clearer to you.�

�You speak as if a cruiser had nothing to do but take prizes.  If that is
your view, you will permit me to say that you know very little of the
matter.  I have handled a sloop, a corvette, and a frigate, and I have
found a great variety of duties in each of them.  I have had to avoid the
enemy�s battleships and to fight his cruisers.  I have had to chase and
capture his privateers, and to cut them out when they run under his
batteries.  I have had to engage his forts, to take my men ashore, and to
destroy his guns and his signal stations.  All this, with convoying,
reconnoitring, and risking one�s own ship in order to gain a knowledge of
the enemy�s movements, comes under the duties of the commander of a
cruiser.  I make bold to say that the man who can carry these objects out
with success has deserved better of the country than the officer of a
battleship, tacking from Ushant to the Black Rocks and back again until
she builds up a reef with her beef-bones.�

�Sir,� said the angry old sailor, �such an officer is at least in no
danger of being mistaken for a privateersman.�

�I am surprised, Captain Bulkeley,� Cochran retorted hotly, �that you
should venture to couple the names of privateersman and King�s officer.�

There was mischief brewing among these hot-headed, short-spoken salts,
but Captain Foley changed the subject to discuss the new ships which were
being built in the French ports.  It was of interest to me to hear these
men, who were spending their lives in fighting against our neighbours,
discussing their character and ways.  You cannot conceive�you who live in
times of peace and charity�how fierce the hatred was in England at that
time against the French, and above all against their great leader.  It
was more than a mere prejudice or dislike.  It was a deep, aggressive
loathing of which you may even now form some conception if you examine
the papers or caricatures of the day.  The word �Frenchman� was hardly
spoken without �rascal� or �scoundrel� slipping in before it.  In all
ranks of life and in every part of the country the feeling was the same.
Even the Jacks aboard our ships fought with a viciousness against a
French vessel which they would never show to Dane, Dutchman, or Spaniard.

If you ask me now, after fifty years, why it was that there should have
been this virulent feeling against them, so foreign to the easy-going and
tolerant British nature, I would confess that I think the real reason was
fear.  Not fear of them individually, of course�our foulest detractors
have never called us faint-hearted�but fear of their star, fear of their
future, fear of the subtle brain whose plans always seemed to go aright,
and of the heavy hand which had struck nation after nation to the ground.
We were but a small country, with a population which, when the war began,
was not much more than half that of France.  And then, France had
increased by leaps and bounds, reaching out to the north into Belgium and
Holland, and to the south into Italy, whilst we were weakened by
deep-lying disaffection among both Catholics and Presbyterians in
Ireland.  The danger was imminent and plain to the least thoughtful.  One
could not walk the Kent coast without seeing the beacons heaped up to
tell the country of the enemy�s landing, and if the sun were shining on
the uplands near Boulogne, one might catch the flash of its gleam upon
the bayonets of manoeuvring veterans.  No wonder that a fear of the
French power lay deeply in the hearts of the most gallant men, and that
fear should, as it always does, beget a bitter and rancorous hatred.

The seamen did not speak kindly then of their recent enemies.  Their
hearts loathed them, and in the fashion of our country their lips said
what the heart felt.  Of the French officers they could not have spoken
with more chivalry, as of worthy foemen, but the nation was an
abomination to them.  The older men had fought against them in the
American War, they had fought again for the last ten years, and the
dearest wish of their hearts seemed to be that they might be called upon
to do the same for the remainder of their days.  Yet if I was surprised
by the virulence of their animosity against the French, I was even more
so to hear how highly they rated them as antagonists.  The long
succession of British victories which had finally made the French take to
their ports and resign the struggle in despair had given all of us the
idea that for some reason a Briton on the water must, in the nature of
things, always have the best of it against a Frenchman.  But these men
who had done the fighting did not think so.  They were loud in their
praise of their foemen�s gallantry, and precise in their reasons for his
defeat.  They showed how the officers of the old French Navy had nearly
all been aristocrats.  How the Revolution had swept them out of their
ships, and the force been left with insubordinate seamen and no competent
leaders.  This ill-directed fleet had been hustled into port by the
pressure of the well-manned and well-commanded British, who had pinned
them there ever since, so that they had never had an opportunity of
learning seamanship.  Their harbour drill and their harbour gunnery had
been of no service when sails had to be trimmed and broadsides fired on
the heave of an Atlantic swell.  Let one of their frigates get to sea and
have a couple of years� free run in which the crew might learn their
duties, and then it would be a feather in the cap of a British officer if
with a ship of equal force he could bring down her colours.

Such were the views of these experienced officers, fortified by many
reminiscences and examples of French gallantry, such as the way in which
the crew of the _L�Orient_ had fought her quarter-deck guns when the
main-deck was in a blaze beneath them, and when they must have known that
they were standing over an exploding magazine.  The general hope was that
the West Indian expedition since the peace might have given many of their
fleet an ocean training, and that they might be tempted out into
mid-Channel if the war were to break out afresh.  But would it break out
afresh?  We had spent gigantic sums and made enormous exertions to curb
the power of Napoleon and to prevent him from becoming the universal
despot of Europe.  Would the Government try it again?  Or were they
appalled by the gigantic load of debt which must bend the backs of many
generations unborn?  Pitt was there, and surely he was not a man to leave
his work half done.

And then suddenly there was a bustle at the door.  Amid the grey swirl of
the tobacco-smoke I could catch a glimpse of a blue coat and gold
epaulettes, with a crowd gathering thickly round them, while a hoarse
murmur rose from the group which thickened into a deep-chested cheer.
Every one was on his feet, peering and asking each other what it might
mean.  And still the crowd seethed and the cheering swelled.

�What is it?  What has happened?� cried a score of voices.

�Put him up!  Hoist him up!� shouted somebody, and an instant later I saw
Captain Troubridge appear above the shoulders of the crowd.  His face was
flushed, as if he were in wine, and he was waving what seemed to be a
letter in the air.  The cheering died away, and there was such a hush
that I could hear the crackle of the paper in his hand.

�Great news, gentlemen!� he roared.  �Glorious news!  Rear-Admiral
Collingwood has directed me to communicate it to you.  The French
Ambassador has received his papers to-night.  Every ship on the list is
to go into commission.  Admiral Cornwallis is ordered out of Cawsand Bay
to cruise off Ushant.  A squadron is starting for the North Sea and
another for the Irish Channel.�

He may have had more to say, but his audience could wait no longer.  How
they shouted and stamped and raved in their delight!  Harsh old
flag-officers, grave post-captains, young lieutenants, all were roaring
like schoolboys breaking up for the holidays.  There was no thought now
of those manifold and weary grievances to which I had listened.  The foul
weather was passed, and the landlocked sea-birds would be out on the foam
once more.  The rhythm of �God Save the King� swelled through the babel,
and I heard the old lines sung in a way that made you forget their bad
rhymes and their bald sentiments.  I trust that you will never hear them
so sung, with tears upon rugged cheeks, and catchings of the breath from
strong men.  Dark days will have come again before you hear such a song
or see such a sight as that.  Let those talk of the phlegm of our
countrymen who have never seen them when the lava crust of restraint is
broken, and when for an instant the strong, enduring fires of the North
glow upon the surface.  I saw them then, and if I do not see them now, I
am not so old or so foolish as to doubt that they are there.




CHAPTER XIII.
LORD NELSON.


MY father�s appointment with Lord Nelson was an early one, and he was the
more anxious to be punctual as he knew how much the Admiral�s movements
must be affected by the news which we had heard the night before.  I had
hardly breakfasted then, and my uncle had not rung for his chocolate,
when he called for me at Jermyn Street.  A walk of a few hundred yards
brought us to the high building of discoloured brick in Piccadilly, which
served the Hamiltons as a town house, and which Nelson used as his
head-quarters when business or pleasure called him from Merton.  A
footman answered our knock, and we were ushered into a large drawing-room
with sombre furniture and melancholy curtains.  My father sent in his
name, and there we sat, looking at the white Italian statuettes in the
corners, and the picture of Vesuvius and the Bay of Naples which hung
over the harpsichord.  I can remember that a black clock was ticking
loudly upon the mantelpiece, and that every now and then, amid the rumble
of the hackney coaches, we could hear boisterous laughter from some inner
chamber.

When at last the door opened, both my father and I sprang to our feet,
expecting to find ourselves face to face with the greatest living
Englishman.  It was a very different person, however, who swept into the
room.

She was a lady, tall, and, as it seemed to me, exceedingly beautiful,
though, perhaps, one who was more experienced and more critical might
have thought that her charm lay in the past rather than the present.  Her
queenly figure was moulded upon large and noble lines, while her face,
though already tending to become somewhat heavy and coarse, was still
remarkable for the brilliancy of the complexion, the beauty of the large,
light blue eyes, and the tinge of the dark hair which curled over the low
white forehead.  She carried herself in the most stately fashion, so that
as I looked at her majestic entrance, and at the pose which she struck as
she glanced at my father, I was reminded of the Queen of the Peruvians
as, in the person of Miss Polly Hinton, she incited Boy Jim and myself to
insurrection.

�Lieutenant Anson Stone?� she asked.

�Yes, your ladyship,� answered my father.

�Ah,� she cried, with an affected and exaggerated start, �you know me,
then?�

�I have seen your ladyship at Naples.�

�Then you have doubtless seen my poor Sir William also�my poor, poor Sir
William!�  She touched her dress with her white, ring-covered fingers, as
if to draw our attention to the fact that she was in the deepest
mourning.

�I heard of your ladyship�s sad loss,� said my father.

�We died together,� she cried.  �What can my life be now save a
long-drawn living death?�

She spoke in a beautiful, rich voice, with the most heart-broken thrill
in it, but I could not conceal from myself that she appeared to be one of
the most robust persons that I had ever seen, and I was surprised to
notice that she shot arch little questioning glances at me, as if the
admiration even of so insignificant a person were of some interest to
her.  My father, in his blunt, sailor fashion, tried to stammer out some
commonplace condolence, but her eyes swept past his rude, weather-beaten
face to ask and reask what effect she had made upon me.

�There he hangs, the tutelary angel of this house,� she cried, pointing
with a grand sweeping gesture to a painting upon the wall, which
represented a very thin-faced, high-nosed gentleman with several orders
upon his coat.  �But enough of my private sorrow!�  She dashed invisible
tears from her eyes.  �You have come to see Lord Nelson.  He bid me say
that he would be with you in an instant.  You have doubtless heard that
hostilities are about to reopen?�

�We heard the news last night.�

�Lord Nelson is under orders to take command of the Mediterranean Fleet.
You can think at such a moment�But, ah, is it not his lordship�s step
that I hear?�

My attention was so riveted by the lady�s curious manner and by the
gestures and attitudes with which she accompanied every remark, that I
did not see the great admiral enter the room.  When I turned he was
standing close by my elbow, a small, brown man with the lithe, slim
figure of a boy.  He was not clad in uniform, but he wore a high-collared
brown coat, with the right sleeve hanging limp and empty by his side.
The expression of his face was, as I remember it, exceedingly sad and
gentle, with the deep lines upon it which told of the chafing of his
urgent and fiery soul.  One eye was disfigured and sightless from a
wound, but the other looked from my father to myself with the quickest
and shrewdest of expressions.  Indeed, his whole manner, with his short,
sharp glance and the fine poise of the head, spoke of energy and
alertness, so that he reminded me, if I may compare great things with
small, of a well-bred fighting terrier, gentle and slim, but keen and
ready for whatever chance might send.

�Why, Lieutenant Stone,� said he, with great cordiality, holding out his
left hand to my father, �I am very glad to see you.  London is full of
Mediterranean men, but I trust that in a week there will not be an
officer amongst you all with his feet on dry land.�

�I had come to ask you, sir, if you could assist me to a ship.�

�You shall have one, Stone, if my word goes for anything at the
Admiralty.  I shall want all my old Nile men at my back.  I cannot
promise you a first-rate, but at least it shall be a 64-gun ship, and I
can tell you that there is much to be done with a handy, well-manned,
well-found 64-gun ship.�

�Who could doubt it who has heard of the _Agamemnon_?� cried Lady
Hamilton, and straightway she began to talk of the admiral and of his
doings with such extravagance of praise and such a shower of compliments
and of epithets, that my father and I did not know which way to look,
feeling shame and sorrow for a man who was compelled to listen to such
things said in his own presence.  But when I ventured to glance at Lord
Nelson I found, to my surprise, that, far from showing any embarrassment,
he was smiling with pleasure, as if this gross flattery of her ladyship�s
were the dearest thing in all the world to him.

�Come, come, my dear lady,� said he, �you speak vastly beyond my merits;�
upon which encouragement she started again in a theatrical apostrophe to
Britain�s darling and Neptune�s eldest son, which he endured with the
same signs of gratitude and pleasure.  That a man of the world,
five-and-forty years of age, shrewd, honest, and acquainted with Courts,
should be beguiled by such crude and coarse homage, amazed me, as it did
all who knew him; but you who have seen much of life do not need to be
told how often the strongest and noblest nature has its one inexplicable
weakness, showing up the more obviously in contrast to the rest, as the
dark stain looks the fouler upon the whitest sheet.

�You are a sea-officer of my own heart, Stone,� said he, when her
ladyship had exhausted her panegyric.  �You are one of the old breed!�
He walked up and down the room with little, impatient steps as he talked,
turning with a whisk upon his heel every now and then, as if some
invisible rail had brought him up.  �We are getting too fine for our work
with these new-fangled epaulettes and quarter-deck trimmings.  When I
joined the Service, you would find a lieutenant gammoning and rigging his
own bowsprit, or aloft, maybe, with a marlinspike slung round his neck,
showing an example to his men.  Now, it�s as much as he�ll do to carry
his own sextant up the companion.  When could you join?�

�To-night, my lord.�

�Right, Stone, right!  That is the true spirit.  They are working double
tides in the yards, but I do not know when the ships will be ready.  I
hoist my flag on the _Victory_ on Wednesday, and we sail at once.�

�No, no; not so soon!  She cannot be ready for sea,� said Lady Hamilton,
in a wailing voice, clasping her hands and turning up her eyes as she
spoke.

�She must and she shall be ready,� cried Nelson, with extraordinary
vehemence.  �By Heaven! if the devil stands at the door, I sail on
Wednesday.  Who knows what these rascals may be doing in my absence?  It
maddens me to think of the deviltries which they may be devising.  At
this very instant, dear lady, the Queen, _our_ Queen, may be straining
her eyes for the topsails of Nelson�s ships.�

Thinking, as I did, that he was speaking of our own old Queen Charlotte,
I could make no meaning out of this; but my father told me afterwards
that both Nelson and Lady Hamilton had conceived an extraordinary
affection for the Queen of Naples, and that it was the interests of her
little kingdom which he had so strenuously at heart.  It may have been my
expression of bewilderment which attracted Nelson�s attention to me, for
he suddenly stopped in his quick quarter-deck walk, and looked me up and
down with a severe eye.

�Well, young gentleman!� said he, sharply.

�This is my only son, sir,� said my father.  �It is my wish that he
should join the Service, if a berth can be found for him; for we have all
been King�s officers for many generations.�

�So, you wish to come and have your bones broken?� cried Nelson, roughly,
looking with much disfavour at the fine clothes which had cost my uncle
and Mr. Brummel such a debate.  �You will have to change that grand coat
for a tarry jacket if you serve under me, sir.�

I was so embarrassed by the abruptness of his manner that I could but
stammer out that I hoped I should do my duty, on which his stern mouth
relaxed into a good-humoured smile, and he laid his little brown hand for
an instant upon my shoulder.

�I dare say that you will do very well,� said he.  �I can see that you
have the stuff in you.  But do not imagine that it is a light service
which you undertake, young gentleman, when you enter His Majesty�s Navy.
It is a hard profession.  You hear of the few who succeed, but what do
you know of the hundreds who never find their way?  Look at my own luck!
Out of 200 who were with me in the San Juan expedition, 145 died in a
single night.  I have been in 180 engagements, and I have, as you see,
lost my eye and my arm, and been sorely wounded besides.  It chanced that
I came through, and here I am flying my admiral�s flag; but I remember
many a man as good as me who did not come through.  Yes,� he added, as
her ladyship broke in with a voluble protest, �many and many as good a
man who has gone to the sharks or the land-crabs.  But it is a useless
sailor who does not risk himself every day, and the lives of all of us
are in the hands of Him who best knows when to claim them.�

For an instant, in his earnest gaze and reverent manner, we seemed to
catch a glimpse of the deeper, truer Nelson, the man of the Eastern
counties, steeped in the virile Puritanism which sent from that district
the Ironsides to fashion England within, and the Pilgrim Fathers to
spread it without.  Here was the Nelson who declared that he saw the hand
of God pressing upon the French, and who waited on his knees in the cabin
of his flag-ship while she bore down upon the enemy�s line.  There was a
human tenderness, too, in his way of speaking of his dead comrades, which
made me understand why it was that he was so beloved by all who served
with him, for, iron-hard as he was as seaman and fighter, there ran
through his complex nature a sweet and un-English power of affectionate
emotion, showing itself in tears if he were moved, and in such tender
impulses as led him afterwards to ask his flag-captain to kiss him as he
lay dying in the cockpit of the _Victory_.

My father had risen to depart, but the admiral, with that kindliness
which he ever showed to the young, and which had been momentarily chilled
by the unfortunate splendour of my clothes, still paced up and down in
front of us, shooting out crisp little sentences of exhortation and
advice.

�It is ardour that we need in the Service, young gentleman,� said he.
�We need red-hot men who will never rest satisfied.  We had them in the
Mediterranean, and we shall have them again.  There was a band of
brothers!  When I was asked to recommend one for special service, I told
the Admiralty they might take the names as they came, for the same spirit
animated them all.  Had we taken nineteen vessels, we should never have
said it was well done while the twentieth sailed the seas.  You know how
it was with us, Stone.  You are too old a Mediterranean man for me to
tell you anything.�

�I trust, my lord, that I shall be with you when next we meet them,� said
my father.

�Meet them we shall and must.  By Heaven, I shall never rest until I have
given them a shaking.  The scoundrel Buonaparte wishes to humble us.  Let
him try, and God help the better cause!�

He spoke with such extraordinary animation that the empty sleeve flapped
about in the air, giving him the strangest appearance.  Seeing my eyes
fixed upon it, he turned with a smile to my father.

�I can still work my fin, Stone,� said he, putting his hand across to the
stump of his arm.  �What used they to say in the fleet about it?�

�That it was a sign, sir, that it was a bad hour to cross your hawse.�

�They knew me, the rascals.  You can see, young gentleman, that not a
scrap of the ardour with which I serve my country has been shot away.
Some day you may find that you are flying your own flag, and when that
time comes you may remember that my advice to an officer is that he
should have nothing to do with tame, slow measures.  Lay all your stake,
and if you lose through no fault of your own, the country will find you
another stake as large.  Never mind man�uvres!  Go for them!  The only
man�uvre you need is that which will place you alongside your enemy.
Always fight, and you will always be right.  Give not a thought to your
own ease or your own life, for from the day that you draw the blue coat
over your back you have no life of your own.  It is the country�s, to be
most freely spent if the smallest gain can come from it.  How is the wind
this morning, Stone?�

�East-south-east,� my father answered, readily.

�Then Cornwallis is, doubtless, keeping well up to Brest, though, for my
own part, I had rather tempt them out into the open sea.�

�That is what every officer and man in the fleet would prefer, your
lordship,� said my father.

�They do not love the blockading service, and it is little wonder, since
neither money nor honour is to be gained at it.  You can remember how it
was in the winter months before Toulon, Stone, when we had neither
firing, wine, beef, pork, nor flour aboard the ships, nor a spare piece
of rope, canvas, or twine.  We braced the old hulks with our spare
cables, and God knows there was never a Levanter that I did not expect it
to send us to the bottom.  But we held our grip all the same.  Yet I fear
that we do not get much credit for it here in England, Stone, where they
light the windows for a great battle, but they do not understand that it
is easier for us to fight the Nile six times over, than to keep our
station all winter in the blockade.  But I pray God that we may meet this
new fleet of theirs and settle the matter by a pell-mell battle.�

�May I be with you, my lord!� said my father, earnestly.  �But we have
already taken too much of your time, and so I beg to thank you for your
kindness and to wish you good morning.�

�Good morning, Stone!� said Nelson.  �You shall have your ship, and if I
can make this young gentleman one of my officers it shall be done.  But I
gather from his dress,� he continued, running his eye over me, �that you
have been more fortunate in prize-money than most of your comrades.  For
my own part, I never did nor could turn my thoughts to money-making.�

My father explained that I had been under the charge of the famous Sir
Charles Tregellis, who was my uncle, and with whom I was now residing.

�Then you need no help from me,� said Nelson, with some bitterness.  �If
you have either guineas or interest you can climb over the heads of old
sea-officers, though you may not know the poop from the galley, or a
carronade from a long nine.  Nevertheless�But what the deuce have we
here?�

The footman had suddenly precipitated himself into the room, but stood
abashed before the fierce glare of the admiral�s eye.

�Your lordship told me to rush to you if it should come,� he explained,
holding out a large blue envelope.

�By Heaven, it is my orders!� cried Nelson, snatching it up and fumbling
with it in his awkward, one-handed attempt to break the seals.  Lady
Hamilton ran to his assistance, but no sooner had she glanced at the
paper inclosed than she burst into a shrill scream, and throwing up her
hands and her eyes, she sank backwards in a swoon.  I could not but
observe, however, that her fall was very carefully executed, and that she
was fortunate enough, in spite of her insensibility, to arrange her
drapery and attitude into a graceful and classical design.  But he, the
honest seaman, so incapable of deceit or affectation that he could not
suspect it in others, ran madly to the bell, shouting for the maid, the
doctor, and the smelling-salts, with incoherent words of grief, and such
passionate terms of emotion that my father thought it more discreet to
twitch me by the sleeve as a signal that we should steal from the room.
There we left him then in the dim-lit London drawing-room, beside himself
with pity for this shallow and most artificial woman, while without, at
the edge of the Piccadilly curb, there stood the high dark berline ready
to start him upon that long journey which was to end in his chase of the
French fleet over seven thousand miles of ocean, his meeting with it, his
victory, which confined Napoleon�s ambition for ever to the land, and his
death, coming, as I would it might come to all of us, at the crowning
moment of his life.




CHAPTER XIV.
ON THE ROAD.


AND now the day of the great fight began to approach.  Even the imminent
outbreak of war and the renewed threats of Napoleon were secondary things
in the eyes of the sportsmen�and the sportsmen in those days made a large
half of the population.  In the club of the patrician and the plebeian
gin-shop, in the coffee-house of the merchant or the barrack of the
soldier, in London or the provinces, the same question was interesting
the whole nation.  Every west-country coach brought up word of the fine
condition of Crab Wilson, who had returned to his own native air for his
training, and was known to be under the immediate care of Captain
Barclay, the expert.  On the other hand, although my uncle had not yet
named his man, there was no doubt amongst the public that Jim was to be
his nominee, and the report of his physique and of his performance found
him many backers.  On the whole, however, the betting was in favour of
Wilson, for Bristol and the west country stood by him to a man, whilst
London opinion was divided.  Three to two were to be had on Wilson at any
West End club two days before the battle.

I had twice been down to Crawley to see Jim in his training quarters,
where I found him undergoing the severe regimen which was usual.  From
early dawn until nightfall he was running, jumping, striking a bladder
which swung upon a bar, or sparring with his formidable trainer.  His
eyes shone and his skin glowed with exuberent health, and he was so
confident of success that my own misgivings vanished as I watched his
gallant bearing and listened to his quiet and cheerful words.

�But I wonder that you should come and see me now, Rodney,� said he, when
we parted, trying to laugh as he spoke.  �I have become a bruiser and
your uncle�s paid man, whilst you are a Corinthian upon town.  If you had
not been the best and truest little gentleman in the world, you would
have been my patron instead of my friend before now.�

When I looked at this splendid fellow, with his high-bred, clean-cut
face, and thought of the fine qualities and gentle, generous impulses
which I knew to lie within him, it seemed so absurd that he should speak
as though my friendship towards him were a condescension, that I could
not help laughing aloud.

�That is all very well, Rodney,� said he, looking hard into my eyes.
�But what does your uncle think about it?�

This was a poser, and I could only answer lamely enough that, much as I
was indebted to my uncle, I had known Jim first, and that I was surely
old enough to choose my own friends.

Jim�s misgivings were so far correct that my uncle did very strongly
object to any intimacy between us; but there were so many other points in
which he disapproved of my conduct, that it made the less difference.  I
fear that he was already disappointed in me.  I would not develop an
eccentricity, although he was good enough to point out several by which I
might �come out of the ruck,� as he expressed it, and so catch the
attention of the strange world in which he lived.

�You are an active young fellow, nephew,� said he.  �Do you not think
that you could engage to climb round the furniture of an ordinary room
without setting foot upon the ground?  Some little _tour-de-force_ of the
sort is in excellent taste.  There was a captain in the Guards who
attained considerable social success by doing it for a small wager.  Lady
Lieven, who is exceedingly exigeant, used to invite him to her evenings
merely that he might exhibit it.�

I had to assure him that the feat would be beyond me.

�You are just a little _difficile_,� said he, shrugging his shoulders.
�As my nephew, you might have taken your position by perpetuating my own
delicacy of taste.  If you had made bad taste your enemy, the world of
fashion would willingly have looked upon you as an arbiter by virtue of
your family traditions, and you might without a struggle have stepped
into the position to which this young upstart Brummell aspires.  But you
have no instinct in that direction.  You are incapable of minute
attention to detail.  Look at your shoes!  Look at your cravat!  Look at
your watch-chain!  Two links are enough to show.  I _have_ shown three,
but it was an indiscretion.  At this moment I can see no less than five
of yours.  I regret it, nephew, but I do not think that you are destined
to attain that position which I have a right to expect from my blood
relation.�

�I am sorry to be a disappointment to you, sir,� said I.

�It is your misfortune not to have come under my influence earlier,� said
he.  �I might then have moulded you so as to have satisfied even my own
aspirations.  I had a younger brother whose case was a similar one.  I
did what I could for him, but he would wear ribbons in his shoes, and he
publicly mistook white Burgundy for Rhine wine.  Eventually the poor
fellow took to books, and lived and died in a country vicarage.  He was a
good man, but he was commonplace, and there is no place in society for
commonplace people.�

�Then I fear, sir, that there is none for me,� said I.  �But my father
has every hope that Lord Nelson will find me a position in the fleet.  If
I have been a failure in town, I am none the less conscious of your
kindness in trying to advance my interests, and I hope that, should I
receive my commission, I may be a credit to you yet.�

�It is possible that you may attain the very spot which I had marked out
for you, but by another road,� said my uncle.  �There are many men in
town, such as Lord St. Vincent, Lord Hood, and others, who move in the
most respectable circles, although they have nothing but their services
in the Navy to recommend them.�

It was on the afternoon of the day before the fight that this
conversation took place between my uncle and myself in the dainty sanctum
of his Jermyn-Street house.  He was clad, I remember, in his flowing
brocade dressing-gown, as was his custom before he set off for his club,
and his foot was extended upon a stool�for Abernethy had just been in to
treat him for an incipient attack of the gout.  It may have been the
pain, or it may have been his disappointment at my career, but his manner
was more testy than was usual with him, and I fear that there was
something of a sneer in his smile as he spoke of my deficiencies.  For my
own part I was relieved at the explanation, for my father had left London
in the full conviction that a vacancy would speedily be found for us
both, and the one thing which had weighed upon my mind was that I might
have found it hard to leave my uncle without interfering with the plans
which he had formed.  I was heart-weary of this empty life, for which I
was so ill-fashioned, and weary also of that intolerant talk which would
make a coterie of frivolous women and foolish fops the central point of
the universe.  Something of my uncle�s sneer may have flickered upon my
lips as I heard him allude with supercilious surprise to the presence in
those sacrosanct circles of the men who had stood between the country and
destruction.

�By the way, nephew,� said he, �gout or no gout, and whether Abernethy
likes it or not, we must be down at Crawley to-night.  The battle will
take place upon Crawley Downs.  Sir Lothian Hume and his man are at
Reigate.  I have reserved beds at the George for both of us.  The crush
will, it is said, exceed anything ever known.  The smell of these country
inns is always most offensive to me�_mais que voulez-vous_?  Berkeley
Craven was saying in the club last night that there is not a bed within
twenty miles of Crawley which is not bespoke, and that they are charging
three guineas for the night.  I hope that your young friend, if I must
describe him as such, will fulfil the promise which he has shown, for I
have rather more upon the event than I care to lose.  Sir Lothian has
been plunging also�he made a single bye-bet of five thousand to three
upon Wilson in Limmer�s yesterday.  From what I hear of his affairs it
will be a serious matter for him if we should pull it off.  Well,
Lorimer?�

�A person to see you, Sir Charles,� said the new valet.

�You know that I never see any one until my dressing is complete.�

�He insists upon seeing you, sir.  He pushed open the door.�

�Pushed it open!  What d�you mean, Lorimer?  Why didn�t you put him out?�

A smile passed over the servant�s face.  At the same moment there came a
deep voice from the passage.

�You show me in this instant, young man, d�ye �ear?  Let me see your
master, or it�ll be the worse for you.�

I thought that I had heard the voice before, but when, over the shoulder
of the valet, I caught a glimpse of a large, fleshy, bull-face, with a
flattened Michael Angelo nose in the centre of it, I knew at once that it
was my neighbour at the supper party.

�It�s Warr, the prizefighter, sir,� said I.

�Yes, sir,� said our visitor, pushing his huge form into the room.  �It�s
Bill Warr, landlord of the One Ton public-�ouse, Jermyn Street, and the
gamest man upon the list.  There�s only one thing that ever beat me, Sir
Charles, and that was my flesh, which creeps over me that amazin� fast
that I�ve always got four stone that �as no business there.  Why, sir,
I�ve got enough to spare to make a feather-weight champion out of.  You�d
�ardly think, to look at me, that even after Mendoza fought me I was able
to jump the four-foot ropes at the ring-side just as light as a little
kiddy; but if I was to chuck my castor into the ring now I�d never get it
till the wind blew it out again, for blow my dicky if I could climb
after.  My respec�s to you, young sir, and I �ope I see you well.�

My uncle�s face had expressed considerable disgust at this invasion of
his privacy, but it was part of his position to be on good terms with the
fighting-men, so he contented himself with asking curtly what business
had brought him there.  For answer the huge prizefighter looked meaningly
at the valet.

�It�s important, Sir Charles, and between man and man,� said he.

�You may go, Lorimer.  Now, Warr, what is the matter?�

The bruiser very calmly seated himself astride of a chair with his arms
resting upon the back of it.

�I�ve got information, Sir Charles,� said he.

�Well, what is it?� cried my uncle, impatiently.

�Information of value.�

�Out with it, then!�

�Information that�s worth money,� said Warr, and pursed up his lips.

�I see.  You want to be paid for what you know?�

The prizefighter smiled an affirmative.

�Well, I don�t buy things on trust.  You should know me better than to
try on such a game with me.�

�I know you for what you are, Sir Charles, and that is a noble, slap-up
Corinthian.  But if I was to use this against you, d�ye see, it would be
worth �undreds in my pocket.  But my �eart won�t let me do it, for Bill
Warr�s always been on the side o� good sport and fair play.  If I use it
for you, then I expect that you won�t see me the loser.�

�You can do what you like,� said my uncle.  �If your news is of service
to me, I shall know how to treat you.�

�You can�t say fairer than that.  We�ll let it stand there, gov�nor, and
you�ll do the �andsome thing, as you �ave always �ad the name for doin�.
Well, then, your man, Jim �Arisen, fights Crab Wilson, of Gloucester, at
Crawley Down to-morrow mornin� for a stake.�

�What of that?�

�Did you �appen to know what the bettin� was yesterday?�

�It was three to two on Wilson.�

�Right you are, gov�nor.  Three to two was offered in my own bar-parlour.
D�you know what the bettin� is to-day?�

�I have not been out yet.�

�Then I�ll tell you.  It�s seven to one against your man.�

�What?�

�Seven to one, gov�nor, no less.�

�You�re talking nonsense, Warr!  How could the betting change from three
to two to seven to one?�

�Ive been to Tom Owen�s, and I�ve been to the �Ole in the Wall, and I�ve
been to the Waggon and �Orses, and you can get seven to one in any of
them.  There�s tons of money being laid against your man.  It�s a �orse
to a �en in every sportin� �ouse and boozin� ken from �ere to Stepney.�

For a moment the expression upon my uncle�s face made me realize that
this match was really a serious matter to him.  Then he shrugged his
shoulders with an incredulous smile.

�All the worse for the fools who give the odds,� said he.  �My man is all
right.  You saw him yesterday, nephew?�

�He was all right yesterday, sir.�

�If anything had gone wrong I should have heard.�

�But perhaps,� said Warr, �it �as not gone wrong with �im _yet_.�

�What d�you mean?�

�I�ll tell you what I mean, sir.  You remember Berks?  You know that �e
ain�t to be overmuch depended on at any time, and that �e �ad a grudge
against your man �cause �e laid �im out in the coach-�ouse.  Well, last
night about ten o�clock in �e comes into my bar, and the three bloodiest
rogues in London at �is �eels.  There was Red Ike, �im that was warned
off the ring �cause �e fought a cross with Bittoon; and there was
Fightin� Yussef, who would sell �is mother for a seven-shillin�-bit; the
third was Chris McCarthy, who is a fogle-snatcher by trade, with a pitch
outside the �Aymarket Theatre.  You don�t often see four such beauties
together, and all with as much as they could carry, save only Chris, who
is too leary a cove to drink when there�s somethin� goin� forward.  For
my part, I showed �em into the parlour, not �cos they was worthy of it,
but �cos I knew right well they would start bashin� some of my customers,
and maybe get my license into trouble if I left �em in the bar.  I served
�em with drink, and stayed with �em just to see that they didn�t lay
their �ands on the stuffed parroquet and the pictures.

�Well, gov�nor, to cut it short, they began to talk about the fight, and
they all laughed at the idea that young Jim �Arrison could win it�all
except Chris, and e� kept a-nudging and a-twitchin� at the others until
Joe Berks nearly gave him a wipe across the face for �is trouble.  I saw
somethin� was in the wind, and it wasn�t very �ard to guess what it
was�especially when Red Ike was ready to put up a fiver that Jim �Arrison
would never fight at all.  So I up to get another bottle of liptrap, and
I slipped round to the shutter that we pass the liquor through from the
private bar into the parlour.  I drew it an inch open, and I might �ave
been at the table with them, I could �ear every word that clearly.

�There was Chris McCarthy growlin� at them for not keepin� their tongues
still, and there was Joe Berks swearin� that �e would knock �is face in
if �e dared give �im any of �is lip.  So Chris �e sort of argued with
them, for �e was frightened of Berks, and �e put it to them whether they
would be fit for the job in the mornin�, and whether the gov�nor would
pay the money if �e found they �ad been drinkin� and were not to be
trusted.  This struck them sober, all three, an� Fighting Yussef asked
what time they were to start.  Chris said that as long as they were at
Crawley before the George shut up they could work it.  �It�s poor pay for
a chance of a rope,� said Red Ike.  �Rope be damned!� cried Chris, takin�
a little loaded stick out of his side pocket.  �If three of you �old him
down and I break his arm-bone with this, we�ve earned our money, and we
don�t risk more�n six months� jug.�  ��E�ll fight,� said Berks.  �Well,
it�s the only fight �e�ll get,� answered Chris, and that was all I �eard
of it.  This mornin� out I went, and I found as I told you afore that the
money is goin� on to Wilson by the ton, and that no odds are too long for
the layers.  So it stands, gov�nor, and you know what the meanin� of it
may be better than Bill Warr can tell you.�

�Very good, Warr,� said my uncle, rising.  �I am very much obliged to you
for telling me this, and I will see that you are not a loser by it.  I
put it down as the gossip of drunken ruffians, but none the less you have
served me vastly by calling my attention to it.  I suppose I shall see
you at the Downs to-morrow?�

�Mr. Jackson �as asked me to be one o� the beaters-out, sir.�

�Very good.  I hope that we shall have a fair and good fight.  Good day
to you, and thank you.�

My uncle had preserved his jaunty demeanour as long as Warr was in the
room, but the door had hardly closed upon him before he turned to me with
a face which was more agitated than I had ever seen it.

�We must be off for Crawley at once, nephew,� said he, ringing the bell.
�There�s not a moment to be lost.  Lorimer, order the bays to be
harnessed in the curricle.  Put the toilet things in, and tell William to
have it round at the door as soon as possible.�

�I�ll see to it, sir,� said I, and away I ran to the mews in Little Ryder
Street, where my uncle stabled his horses.  The groom was away, and I had
to send a lad in search of him, while with the help of the livery-man I
dragged the curricle from the coach-house and brought the two mares out
of their stalls.  It was half an hour, or possibly three-quarters, before
everything had been found, and Lorimer was already waiting in Jermyn
Street with the inevitable baskets, whilst my uncle stood in the open
door of his house, clad in his long fawn-coloured driving-coat, with no
sign upon his calm pale face of the tumult of impatience which must, I
was sure, be raging within.

�We shall leave you, Lorimer,� said he.  �We might find it hard to get a
bed for you.  Keep at her head, William!  Jump in, nephew.  Halloa, Warr,
what is the matter now?�

The prizefighter was hastening towards us as fast as his bulk would
allow.

�Just one word before you go, Sir Charles,� he panted.  �I�ve just �eard
in my taproom that the four men I spoke of left for Crawley at one
o�clock.�

�Very good, Warr,� said my uncle, with his foot upon the step.

�And the odds �ave risen to ten to one.�

�Let go her head, William!�

�Just one more word, gov�nor.  You�ll excuse the liberty, but if I was
you I�d take my pistols with me.�

�Thank you; I have them.�

The long thong cracked between the ears of the leader, the groom sprang
for the pavement, and Jermyn Street had changed for St. James�s, and that
again for Whitehall with a swiftness which showed that the gallant mares
were as impatient as their master.  It was half-past four by the
Parliament clock as we flew on to Westminster Bridge.  There was the
flash of water beneath us, and then we were between those two long
dun-coloured lines of houses which had been the avenue which had led us
to London.  My uncle sat with tightened lips and a brooding brow.  We had
reached Streatham before he broke the silence.

�I have a good deal at stake, nephew,� said he.

�So have I, sir,� I answered.

�You!� he cried, in surprise.

�My friend, sir.�

�Ah, yes, I had forgot.  You have some eccentricities, after all, nephew.
You are a faithful friend, which is a rare enough thing in our circles.
I never had but one friend of my own position, and he�but you�ve heard me
tell the story.  I fear it will be dark before we reach Crawley.�

�I fear that it will.�

�In that case we may be too late.�

�Pray God not, sir!�

�We sit behind the best cattle in England, but I fear lest we find the
roads blocked before we get to Crawley.  Did you observe, nephew, that
these four villains spoke in Warr�s hearing of the master who was behind
them, and who was paying them for their infamy?  Did you not understand
that they were hired to cripple my man?  Who, then, could have hired
them?  Who had an interest unless it was�I know Sir Lothian Hume to be a
desperate man.  I know that he has had heavy card losses at Watier�s and
White�s.  I know also that he has much at stake upon this event, and that
he has plunged upon it with a rashness which made his friends think that
he had some private reason for being satisfied as to the result.  By
Heaven, it all hangs together!  If it should be so�!�  He relapsed into
silence, but I saw the same look of cold fierceness settle upon his
features which I had marked there when he and Sir John Lade had raced
wheel to wheel down the Godstone road.

The sun sank slowly towards the low Surrey hills, and the shadows crept
steadily eastwards, but the whirr of the wheels and the roar of the hoofs
never slackened.  A fresh wind blew upon our faces, while the young
leaves drooped motionless from the wayside branches.  The golden edge of
the sun was just sinking behind the oaks of Reigate Hill when the
dripping mares drew up before the Crown at Redhill.  The landlord, an old
sportsman and ringsider, ran out to greet so well-known a Corinthian as
Sir Charles Tregellis.

�You know Berks, the bruiser?� asked my uncle.

�Yes, Sir Charles.�

�Has he passed?�

�Yes, Sir Charles.  It may have been about four o�clock, though with this
crowd of folk and carriages it�s hard to swear to it.  There was him, and
Red Ike, and Fighting Yussef the Jew, and another, with a good bit of
blood betwixt the shafts.  They�d been driving her hard, too, for she was
all in a lather.�

�That�s ugly, nephew,� said my uncle, when we were flying onwards towards
Reigate.  �If they drove so hard, it looks as though they wished to get
early to work.�

�Jim and Belcher would surely be a match for the four of them,� I
suggested.

�If Belcher were with him I should have no fear.  But you cannot tell
what _diablerie_ they may be up to.  Let us only find him safe and sound,
and I�ll never lose sight of him until I see him in the ring.  We�ll sit
up on guard with our pistols, nephew, and I only trust that these
villains may be indiscreet enough to attempt it.  But they must have been
very sure of success before they put the odds up to such a figure, and it
is that which alarms me.�

�But surely they have nothing to win by such villainy, sir?  If they were
to hurt Jim Harrison the battle could not be fought, and the bets would
not be decided.�

�So it would be in an ordinary prize-battle, nephew; and it is fortunate
that it should be so, or the rascals who infest the ring would soon make
all sport impossible.  But here it is different.  On the terms of the
wager I lose unless I can produce a man, within the prescribed ages, who
can beat Crab Wilson.  You must remember that I have never named my man.
_C�est dommage_, but so it is!  We know who it is and so do our
opponents, but the referees and stakeholder would take no notice of that.
If we complain that Jim Harrison has been crippled, they would answer
that they have no official knowledge that Jim Harrison was our nominee.
It�s play or pay, and the villains are taking advantage of it.�

My uncle�s fears as to our being blocked upon the road were only too well
founded, for after we passed Reigate there was such a procession of every
sort of vehicle, that I believe for the whole eight miles there was not a
horse whose nose was further than a few feet from the back of the
curricle or barouche in front.  Every road leading from London, as well
as those from Guildford in the west and Tunbridge in the east, had
contributed their stream of four-in-hands, gigs, and mounted sportsmen,
until the whole broad Brighton highway was choked from ditch to ditch
with a laughing, singing, shouting throng, all flowing in the same
direction.  No man who looked upon that motley crowd could deny that, for
good or evil, the love of the ring was confined to no class, but was a
national peculiarity, deeply seated in the English nature, and a common
heritage of the young aristocrat in his drag and of the rough costers
sitting six deep in their pony cart.  There I saw statesmen and soldiers,
noblemen and lawyers, farmers and squires, with roughs of the East End
and yokels of the shires, all toiling along with the prospect of a night
of discomfort before them, on the chance of seeing a fight which might,
for all that they knew, be decided in a single round.  A more cheery and
hearty set of people could not be imagined, and the chaff flew about as
thick as the dust clouds, while at every wayside inn the landlord and the
drawers would be out with trays of foam-headed tankards to moisten those
importunate throats.  The ale-drinking, the rude good-fellowship, the
heartiness, the laughter at discomforts, the craving to see the fight�all
these may be set down as vulgar and trivial by those to whom they are
distasteful; but to me, listening to the far-off and uncertain echoes of
our distant past, they seem to have been the very bones upon which much
that is most solid and virile in this ancient race was moulded.

But, alas for our chance of hastening onwards!  Even my uncle�s skill
could not pick a passage through that moving mass.  We could but fall
into our places and be content to snail along from Reigate to Horley and
on to Povey Cross and over Lowfield Heath, while day shaded away into
twilight, and that deepened into night.  At Kimberham Bridge the
carriage-lamps were all lit, and it was wonderful, where the road curved
downwards before us, to see this writhing serpent with the golden scales
crawling before us in the darkness.  And then, at last, we saw the
formless mass of the huge Crawley elm looming before us in the gloom, and
there was the broad village street with the glimmer of the cottage
windows, and the high front of the old George Inn, glowing from every
door and pane and crevice, in honour of the noble company who were to
sleep within that night.




CHAPTER XV.
FOUL PLAY.


MY uncle�s impatience would not suffer him to wait for the slow rotation
which would bring us to the door, but he flung the reins and a
crown-piece to one of the rough fellows who thronged the side-walk, and
pushing his way vigorously through the crowd, he made for the entrance.
As he came within the circle of light thrown by the windows, a whisper
ran round as to who this masterful gentleman with the pale face and the
driving-coat might be, and a lane was formed to admit us.  I had never
before understood the popularity of my uncle in the sporting world, for
the folk began to huzza as we passed with cries of �Hurrah for Buck
Tregellis!  Good luck to you and your man, Sir Charles!  Clear a path for
a bang-up noble Corinthian!� whilst the landlord, attracted by the
shouting, came running out to greet us.

�Good evening, Sir Charles!� he cried.  �I hope I see you well, sir, and
I trust that you will find that your man does credit to the George.�

�How is he?� asked my uncle, quickly.

�Never better, sir.  Looks a picture, he does�and fit to fight for a
kingdom.�

My uncle gave a sigh of relief.

�Where is he?� he asked.

�He�s gone to his room early, sir, seein� that he had some very
partic�lar business to-morrow mornin�,� said the landlord, grinning.

�Where is Belcher?�

�Here he is, in the bar parlour.�

He opened a door as he spoke, and looking in we saw a score of
well-dressed men, some of whose faces had become familiar to me during my
short West End career, seated round a table upon which stood a steaming
soup-tureen filled with punch.  At the further end, very much at his ease
amongst the aristocrats and exquisites who surrounded him, sat the
Champion of England, his superb figure thrown back in his chair, a flush
upon his handsome face, and a loose red handkerchief knotted carelessly
round his throat in the picturesque fashion which was long known by his
name.  Half a century has passed since then, and I have seen my share of
fine men.  Perhaps it is because I am a slight creature myself, but it is
my peculiarity that I had rather look upon a splendid man than upon any
work of Nature.  Yet during all that time I have never seen a finer man
than Jim Belcher, and if I wish to match him in my memory, I can only
turn to that other Jim whose fate and fortunes I am trying to lay before
you.

There was a shout of jovial greeting when my uncle�s face was seen in the
doorway.

�Come in, Tregellis!�  �We were expecting you!�  �There�s a devilled
bladebone ordered.�  �What�s the latest from London?�  �What is the
meaning of the long odds against your man?�  �Have the folk gone mad?�
�What the devil is it all about?�  They were all talking at once.

�Excuse me, gentlemen,� my uncle answered.  �I shall be happy to give you
any information in my power a little later.  I have a matter of some
slight importance to decide.  Belcher, I would have a word with you!�

The Champion came out with us into the passage.

�Where is your man, Belcher?�

�He has gone to his room, sir.  I believe that he should have a clear
twelve hours� sleep before fighting.�

�What sort of day has he had?�

�I did him lightly in the matter of exercise.  Clubs, dumbbells, walking,
and a half-hour with the mufflers.  He�ll do us all proud, sir, or I�m a
Dutchman!  But what in the world�s amiss with the betting?  If I didn�t
know that he was as straight as a line, I�d ha� thought he was planning a
cross and laying against himself.�

�It�s about that I�ve hurried down.  I have good information, Belcher,
that there has been a plot to cripple him, and that the rogues are so
sure of success that they are prepared to lay anything against his
appearance.�

Belcher whistled between his teeth.

�I�ve seen no sign of anything of the kind, sir.  No one has been near
him or had speech with him, except only your nephew there and myself.�

�Four villains, with Berks at their head, got the start of us by several
hours.  It was Warr who told me.�

�What Bill Warr says is straight, and what Joe Berks does is crooked.
Who were the others, sir?�

�Red Ike, Fighting Yussef, and Chris McCarthy.�

�A pretty gang, too!  Well, sir, the lad is safe, but it would be as
well, perhaps, for one or other of us to stay in his room with him.  For
my own part, as long as he�s my charge I�m never very far away.�

�It is a pity to wake him.�

�He can hardly be asleep with all this racket in the house.  This way,
sir, and down the passage!�

We passed along the low-roofed, devious corridors of the old-fashioned
inn to the back of the house.

�This is my room, sir,� said Belcher, nodding to a door upon the right.
�This one upon the left is his.�  He threw it open as he spoke.  �Here�s
Sir Charles Tregellis come to see you, Jim,� said he; and then, �Good
Lord, what is the meaning of this?�

The little chamber lay before us brightly illuminated by a brass lamp
which stood upon the table.  The bedclothes had not been turned down, but
there was an indentation upon the counterpane which showed that some one
had lain there.  One-half of the lattice window was swinging on its
hinge, and a cloth cap lying upon the table was the only sign of the
occupant.  My uncle looked round him and shook his head.

�It seems that we are too late,� said he.

�That�s his cap, sir.  Where in the world can he have gone to with his
head bare?  I thought he was safe in his bed an hour ago.  Jim!  Jim!� he
shouted.

�He has certainly gone through the window,� cried my uncle.  �I believe
these villains have enticed him out by some devilish device of their own.
Hold the lamp, nephew.  Ha!  I thought so.  Here are his footmarks upon
the flower-bed outside.�

The landlord, and one or two of the Corinthians from the bar-parlour, had
followed us to the back of the house.  Some one had opened the side door,
and we found ourselves in the kitchen garden, where, clustering upon the
gravel path, we were able to hold the lamp over the soft, newly turned
earth which lay between us and the window.

�That�s his footmark!� said Belcher.  �He wore his running boots this
evening, and you can see the nails.  But what�s this?  Some one else has
been here.�

�A woman!� I cried.

�By Heaven, you�re right, nephew,� said my uncle.

Belcher gave a hearty curse.

�He never had a word to say to any girl in the village.  I took
partic�lar notice of that.  And to think of them coming in like this at
the last moment!�

�It�s clear as possible, Tregellis,� said the Hon. Berkeley Craven, who
was one of the company from the bar-parlour.  �Whoever it was came
outside the window and tapped.  You see here, and here, the small feet
have their toes to the house, while the others are all leading away.  She
came to summon him, and he followed her.�

�That is perfectly certain,� said my uncle.  �There�s not a moment to be
lost.  We must divide and search in different directions, unless we can
get some clue as to where they have gone.�

�There�s only the one path out of the garden,� cried the landlord,
leading the way.  �It opens out into this back lane, which leads up to
the stables.  The other end of the lane goes out into the side road.�

The bright yellow glare from a stable lantern cut a ring suddenly from
the darkness, and an ostler came lounging out of the yard.

�Who�s that?� cried the landlord.

�It�s me, master!  Bill Shields.�

�How long have you been there, Bill?�

�Well, master, I�ve been in an� out of the stables this hour back.  We
can�t pack in another �orse, and there�s no use tryin�.  I daren�t �ardly
give them their feed, for, if they was to thicken out just ever so
little��

�See here, Bill.  Be careful how you answer, for a mistake may cost you
your place.  Have you seen any one pass down the lane?�

�There was a feller in a rabbit-skin cap some time ago.  �E was loiterin�
about until I asked �im what �is business was, for I didn�t care about
the looks of �im, or the way that �e was peepin� in at the windows.  I
turned the stable lantern on to �im, but �e ducked �is face, an� I could
only swear to �is red �ead.�

I cast a quick glance at my uncle, and I saw that the shadow had deepened
upon his face.

�What became of him?� he asked.

��E slouched away, sir, an� I saw the last of �im.�

�You�ve seen no one else?  You didn�t, for example, see a woman and a man
pass down the lane together?�

�No, sir.�

�Or hear anything unusual?�

�Why, now that you mention it, sir, I did �ear somethin�; but on a night
like this, when all these London blades are in the village��

�What was it, then?� cried my uncle, impatiently.

�Well, sir, it was a kind of a cry out yonder as if some one �ad got
�imself into trouble.  I thought, maybe, two sparks were fightin�, and I
took no partic�lar notice.�

�Where did it come from?�

�From the side road, yonder.�

�Was it distant?�

�No, sir; I should say it didn�t come from more�n two hundred yards.�

�A single cry?�

�Well, it was a kind of screech, sir, and then I �eard somebody drivin�
very �ard down the road.  I remember thinking that it was strange that
any one should be driving away from Crawley on a great night like this.�

My uncle seized the lantern from the fellow�s hand, and we all trooped
behind him down the lane.  At the further end the road cut it across at
right angles.  Down this my uncle hastened, but his search was not a long
one, for the glaring light fell suddenly upon something which brought a
groan to my lips and a bitter curse to those of Jem Belcher.  Along the
white surface of the dusty highway there was drawn a long smear of
crimson, while beside this ominous stain there lay a murderous little
pocket-bludgeon, such as Warr had described in the morning.




CHAPTER XVI.
CRAWLEY DOWNS.


ALL through that weary night my uncle and I, with Belcher, Berkeley
Craven, and a dozen of the Corinthians, searched the country side for
some trace of our missing man, but save for that ill-boding splash upon
the road not the slightest clue could be obtained as to what had befallen
him.  No one had seen or heard anything of him, and the single cry in the
night of which the ostler told us was the only indication of the tragedy
which had taken place.  In small parties we scoured the country as far as
East Grinstead and Bletchingley, and the sun had been long over the
horizon before we found ourselves back at Crawley once more with heavy
hearts and tired feet.  My uncle, who had driven to Reigate in the hope
of gaining some intelligence, did not return until past seven o�clock,
and a glance at his face gave us the same black news which he gathered
from ours.

We held a council round our dismal breakfast-table, to which Mr. Berkeley
Craven was invited as a man of sound wisdom and large experience in
matters of sport.  Belcher was half frenzied by this sudden ending of all
the pains which he had taken in the training, and could only rave out
threats at Berks and his companions, with terrible menaces as to what he
would do when he met them.  My uncle sat grave and thoughtful, eating
nothing and drumming his fingers upon the table, while my heart was heavy
within me, and I could have sunk my face into my hands and burst into
tears as I thought how powerless I was to aid my friend.  Mr. Craven, a
fresh-faced, alert man of the world, was the only one of us who seemed to
preserve both his wits and his appetite.

�Let me see!  The fight was to be at ten, was it not?� he asked.

�It was to be.�

�I dare say it will be, too.  Never say die, Tregellis!  Your man has
still three hours in which to come back.�

My uncle shook his head.

�The villains have done their work too well for that, I fear,� said he.

�Well, now, let us reason it out,� said Berkeley Craven.  �A woman comes
and she coaxes this young man out of his room.  Do you know any young
woman who had an influence over him?�

My uncle looked at me.

�No,� said I.  �I know of none.�

�Well, we know that she came,� said Berkeley Craven.  �There can be no
question as to that.  She brought some piteous tale, no doubt, such as a
gallant young man could hardly refuse to listen to.  He fell into the
trap, and allowed himself to be decoyed to the place where these rascals
were waiting for him.  We may take all that as proved, I should fancy,
Tregellis.�

�I see no better explanation,� said my uncle.

�Well, then, it is obviously not the interest of these men to kill him.
Warr heard them say as much.  They could not make sure, perhaps, of doing
so tough a young fellow an injury which would certainly prevent him from
fighting.  Even with a broken arm he might pull the fight off, as men
have done before.  There was too much money on for them to run any risks.
They gave him a tap on the head, therefore, to prevent his making too
much resistance, and they then drove him off to some farmhouse or stable,
where they will hold him a prisoner until the time for the fight is over.
I warrant that you see him before to-night as well as ever he was.�

This theory sounded so reasonable that it seemed to lift a little of the
weight from my heart, but I could see that from my uncle�s point of view
it was a poor consolation.

�I dare say you are right, Craven,� said he.

�I am sure that I am.�

�But it won�t help us to win the fight.�

�That�s the point, sir,� cried Belcher.  �By the Lord, I wish they�d let
me take his place, even with my left arm strapped behind me.�

�I should advise you in any case to go to the ringside,� said Craven.
�You should hold on until the last moment in the hope of your man turning
up.�

�I shall certainly do so.  And I shall protest against paying the wagers
under such circumstances.�

Craven shrugged his shoulders.

�You remember the conditions of the match,� said he.  �I fear it is pay
or play.  No doubt the point might be submitted to the referees, but I
cannot doubt that they would have to give it against you.�

We had sunk into a melancholy silence, when suddenly Belcher sprang up
from the table.

�Hark!� he cried.  �Listen to that!�

�What is it?� we cried, all three.

�The betting!  Listen again!�

Out of the babel of voices and roaring of wheels outside the window a
single sentence struck sharply on our ears.

�Even money upon Sir Charles�s nominee!�

�Even money!� cried my uncle.  �It was seven to one against me,
yesterday.  What is the meaning of this?�

�Even money either way,� cried the voice again.

�There�s somebody knows something,� said Belcher, �and there�s nobody has
a better right to know what it is than we.  Come on, sir, and we�ll get
to the bottom of it.�

The village street was packed with people, for they had been sleeping
twelve and fifteen in a room, whilst hundreds of gentlemen had spent the
night in their carriages.  So thick was the throng that it was no easy
matter to get out of the George.  A drunken man, snoring horribly in his
breathing, was curled up in the passage, absolutely oblivious to the
stream of people who flowed round and occasionally over him.

�What�s the betting, boys?� asked Belcher, from the steps.

�Even money, Jim,� cried several voices.

�It was long odds on Wilson when last I heard.�

�Yes; but there came a man who laid freely the other way, and he started
others taking the odds, until now you can get even money.�

�Who started it?�

�Why, that�s he!  The man that lies drunk in the passage.  He�s been
pouring it down like water ever since he drove in at six o�clock, so it�s
no wonder he�s like that.�

Belcher stooped down and turned over the man�s inert head so as to show
his features.

�He�s a stranger to me, sir.�

�And to me,� added my uncle.

�But not to me,� I cried.  �It�s John Cumming, the landlord of the inn at
Friar�s Oak.  I�ve known him ever since I was a boy, and I can�t be
mistaken.�

�Well, what the devil can _he_ know about it?� said Craven.

�Nothing at all, in all probability,� answered my uncle.  �He is backing
young Jim because he knows him, and because he has more brandy than
sense.  His drunken confidence set others to do the same, and so the odds
came down.�

�He was as sober as a judge when he drove in here this morning,� said the
landlord.  �He began backing Sir Charles�s nominee from the moment he
arrived.  Some of the other boys took the office from him, and they very
soon brought the odds down amongst them.�

�I wish he had not brought himself down as well,� said my uncle.  �I beg
that you will bring me a little lavender water, landlord, for the smell
of this crowd is appalling.  I suppose you could not get any sense from
this drunken fellow, nephew, or find out what it is he knows.�

It was in vain that I rocked him by the shoulder and shouted his name in
his ear.  Nothing could break in upon that serene intoxication.

�Well, it�s a unique situation as far as my experience goes,� said
Berkeley Craven.  �Here we are within a couple of hours of the fight, and
yet you don�t know whether you have a man to represent you.  I hope you
don�t stand to lose very much, Tregellis.�

My uncle shrugged his shoulders carelessly, and took a pinch of his snuff
with that inimitable sweeping gesture which no man has ever ventured to
imitate.

�Pretty well, my boy!� said he.  �But it is time that we thought of going
up to the Downs.  This night journey has left me just a little
_effleur�_, and I should like half an hour of privacy to arrange my
toilet.  If this is my last kick, it shall at least be with a
well-brushed boot.�

I have heard a traveller from the wilds of America say that he looked
upon the Red Indian and the English gentleman as closely akin, citing the
passion for sport, the aloofness and the suppression of the emotions in
each.  I thought of his words as I watched my uncle that morning, for I
believe that no victim tied to the stake could have had a worse outlook
before him.  It was not merely that his own fortunes were largely at
stake, but it was the dreadful position in which he would stand before
this immense concourse of people, many of whom had put their money upon
his judgment, if he should find himself at the last moment with an
impotent excuse instead of a champion to put before them.  What a
situation for a man who prided himself upon his aplomb, and upon bringing
all that he undertook to the very highest standard of success!  I, who
knew him well, could tell from his wan cheeks and his restless fingers
that he was at his wit�s ends what to do; but no stranger who observed
his jaunty bearing, the flecking of his laced handkerchief, the handling
of his quizzing glass, or the shooting of his ruffles, would ever have
thought that this butterfly creature could have had a care upon earth.

It was close upon nine o�clock when we were ready to start for the Downs,
and by that time my uncle�s curricle was almost the only vehicle left in
the village street.  The night before they had lain with their wheels
interlocking and their shafts under each other�s bodies, as thick as they
could fit, from the old church to the Crawley Elm, spanning the road
five-deep for a good half-mile in length.  Now the grey village street
lay before us almost deserted save by a few women and children.  Men,
horses, carriages�all were gone.  My uncle drew on his driving-gloves and
arranged his costume with punctilious neatness; but I observed that he
glanced up and down the road with a haggard and yet expectant eye before
he took his seat.  I sat behind with Belcher, while the Hon. Berkeley
Craven took the place beside him.

The road from Crawley curves gently upwards to the upland heather-clad
plateau which extends for many miles in every direction.  Strings of
pedestrians, most of them so weary and dust-covered that it was evident
that they had walked the thirty miles from London during the night, were
plodding along by the sides of the road or trailing over the long mottled
slopes of the moorland.  A horseman, fantastically dressed in green and
splendidly mounted, was waiting at the crossroads, and as he spurred
towards us I recognised the dark, handsome face and bold black eyes of
Mendoza.

�I am waiting here to give the office, Sir Charles,� said he.  �It�s down
the Grinstead road, half a mile to the left.�

�Very good,� said my uncle, reining his mares round into the cross-road.

�You haven�t got your man there,� remarked Mendoza, with something of
suspicion in his manner.

�What the devil is that to you?� cried Belcher, furiously.

�It�s a good deal to all of us, for there are some funny stories about.�

�You keep them to yourself, then, or you may wish you had never heard
them.�

�All right, Jem!  Your breakfast don�t seem to have agreed with you this
morning.�

�Have the others arrived?� asked my uncle, carelessly.

�Not yet, Sir Charles.  But Tom Oliver is there with the ropes and
stakes.  Jackson drove by just now, and most of the ring-keepers are up.�

�We have still an hour,� remarked my uncle, as he drove on.  �It is
possible that the others may be late, since they have to come from
Reigate.�

�You take it like a man, Tregellis,� said Craven.  �We must keep a bold
face and brazen it out until the last moment.�

�Of course, sir,� cried Belcher.  �I�ll never believe the betting would
rise like that if somebody didn�t know something.  We�ll hold on by our
teeth and nails, Sir Charles, and see what comes of it.�

We could hear a sound like the waves upon the beach, long before we came
in sight of that mighty multitude, and then at last, on a sudden dip of
the road, we saw it lying before us, a whirlpool of humanity with an open
vortex in the centre.  All round, the thousands of carriages and horses
were dotted over the moor, and the slopes were gay with tents and booths.
A spot had been chosen for the ring, where a great basin had been
hollowed out in the ground, so that all round that natural amphitheatre a
crowd of thirty thousand people could see very well what was going on in
the centre.  As we drove up a buzz of greeting came from the people upon
the fringe which was nearest to us, spreading and spreading, until the
whole multitude had joined in the acclamation.  Then an instant later a
second shout broke forth, beginning from the other side of the arena, and
the faces which had been turned towards us whisked round, so that in a
twinkling the whole foreground changed from white to dark.

�It�s they.  They are in time,� said my uncle and Craven together.

Standing up on our curricle, we could see the cavalcade approaching over
the Downs.  In front came a huge yellow barouche, in which sat Sir
Lothian Hume, Crab Wilson, and Captain Barclay, his trainer.  The
postillions were flying canary-yellow ribands from their caps, those
being the colours under which Wilson was to fight.  Behind the carriage
there rode a hundred or more noblemen and gentlemen of the west country,
and then a line of gigs, tilburies, and carriages wound away down the
Grinstead road as far as our eyes could follow it.  The big barouche came
lumbering over the sward in our direction until Sir Lothian Hume caught
sight of us, when he shouted to his postillions to pull up.

�Good morning, Sir Charles,� said he, springing out of the carriage.  �I
thought I knew your scarlet curricle.  We have an excellent morning for
the battle.�

My uncle bowed coldly, and made no answer.

�I suppose that since we are all here we may begin at once,� said Sir
Lothian, taking no notice of the other�s manner.

�We begin at ten o�clock.  Not an instant before.�

�Very good, if you prefer it.  By the way, Sir Charles, where is your
man?�

�I would ask _you_ that question, Sir Lothian,� answered my uncle.
�Where is my man?�

A look of astonishment passed over Sir Lothian�s features, which, if it
were not real, was most admirably affected.

�What do you mean by asking me such a question?�

�Because I wish to know.�

�But how can I tell, and what business is it of mine?�

�I have reason to believe that you have made it your business.�

�If you would kindly put the matter a little more clearly there would be
some possibility of my understanding you.�

They were both very white and cold, formal and unimpassioned in their
bearing, but exchanging glances which crossed like rapier blades.  I
thought of Sir Lothian�s murderous repute as a duellist, and I trembled
for my uncle.

�Now, sir, if you imagine that you have a grievance against me, you will
oblige me vastly by putting it into words.�

�I will,� said my uncle.  �There has been a conspiracy to maim or kidnap
my man, and I have every reason to believe that you are privy to it.�

An ugly sneer came over Sir Lothian�s saturnine face.

�I see,� said he.  �Your man has not come on quite as well as you had
expected in his training, and you are hard put to it to invent an excuse.
Still, I should have thought that you might have found a more probable
one, and one which would entail less serious consequences.�

�Sir,� answered my uncle, �you are a liar, but how great a liar you are
nobody knows save yourself.�

Sir Lothian�s hollow cheeks grew white with passion, and I saw for an
instant in his deep-set eyes such a glare as comes from the frenzied
hound rearing and ramping at the end of its chain.  Then, with an effort,
he became the same cold, hard, self-contained man as ever.

�It does not become our position to quarrel like two yokels at a fair,�
said he; �we shall go further into the matter afterwards.�

�I promise you that we shall,� answered my uncle, grimly.

�Meanwhile, I hold you to the terms of your wager.  Unless you produce
your nominee within five-and-twenty minutes, I claim the match.�

�Eight-and-twenty minutes,� said my uncle, looking at his watch.  �You
may claim it then, but not an instant before.�

He was admirable at that moment, for his manner was that of a man with
all sorts of hidden resources, so that I could hardly make myself realize
as I looked at him that our position was really as desperate as I knew it
to be.  In the meantime Berkeley Craven, who had been exchanging a few
words with Sir Lothian Hume, came back to our side.

�I have been asked to be sole referee in this matter,� said he.  �Does
that meet with your wishes, Sir Charles?�

�I should be vastly obliged to you, Craven, if you will undertake the
duties.�

�And Jackson has been suggested as timekeeper.�

�I could not wish a better one.�

�Very good.  That is settled.�

In the meantime the last of the carriages had come up, and the horses had
all been picketed upon the moor.  The stragglers who had dotted the grass
had closed in until the huge crowd was one unit with a single mighty
voice, which was already beginning to bellow its impatience.  Looking
round, there was hardly a moving object upon the whole vast expanse of
green and purple down.  A belated gig was coming at full gallop down the
road which led from the south, and a few pedestrians were still trailing
up from Crawley, but nowhere was there a sign of the missing man.

�The betting keeps up for all that,� said Belcher.  �I�ve just been to
the ring-side, and it is still even.�

�There�s a place for you at the outer ropes, Sir Charles,� said Craven.

�There is no sign of my man yet.  I won�t come in until he arrives.�

�It is my duty to tell you that only ten minutes are left.�

�I make it five,� cried Sir Lothian Hume.

�That is a question which lies with the referee,� said Craven, firmly.
�My watch makes it ten minutes, and ten it must be.�

�Here�s Crab Wilson!� cried Belcher, and at the same moment a shout like
a thunderclap burst from the crowd.  The west countryman had emerged from
his dressing-tent, followed by Dutch Sam and Tom Owen, who were acting as
his seconds.  He was nude to the waist, with a pair of white calico
drawers, white silk stockings, and running shoes.  Round his middle was a
canary-yellow sash, and dainty little ribbons of the same colour
fluttered from the sides of his knees.  He carried a high white hat in
his hand, and running down the lane which had been kept open through the
crowd to allow persons to reach the ring, he threw the hat high into the
air, so that it fell within the staked inclosure.  Then with a double
spring he cleared the outer and inner line of rope, and stood with his
arms folded in the centre.

I do not wonder that the people cheered.  Even Belcher could not help
joining in the general shout of applause.  He was certainly a splendidly
built young athlete, and one could not have wished to look upon a finer
sight as his white skin, sleek and luminous as a panther�s, gleamed in
the light of the morning sun, with a beautiful liquid rippling of muscles
at every movement.  His arms were long and slingy, his shoulders loose
and yet powerful, with the downward slant which is a surer index of power
than squareness can be.  He clasped his hands behind his head, threw them
aloft, and swung them backwards, and at every movement some fresh expanse
of his smooth, white skin became knobbed and gnarled with muscles, whilst
a yell of admiration and delight from the crowd greeted each fresh
exhibition.  Then, folding his arms once more, he stood like a beautiful
statue waiting for his antagonist.

Sir Lothian Hume had been looking impatiently at his watch, and now he
shut it with a triumphant snap.

�Time�s up!� he cried.  �The match is forfeit.�

�Time is not up,� said Craven.

�I have still five minutes.�  My uncle looked round with despairing eyes.

�Only three, Tregellis!�

A deep angry murmur was rising from the crowd.

�It�s a cross!  It�s a cross!  It�s a fake!� was the cry.

�Two minutes, Tregellis!�

�Where�s your man, Sir Charles?  Where�s the man that we have backed?�
Flushed faces began to crane over each other, and angry eyes glared up at
us.

�One more minute, Tregellis!  I am very sorry, but it will be my duty to
declare it forfeit against you.�

There was a sudden swirl in the crowd, a rush, a shout, and high up in
the air there spun an old black hat, floating over the heads of the
ring-siders and flickering down within the ropes.

�Saved, by the Lord!� screamed Belcher.

�I rather fancy,� said my uncle, calmly, �that this must be my man.�

�Too late!� cried Sir Lothian.

�No,� answered the referee.  �It was still twenty seconds to the hour.
The fight will now proceed.�




CHAPTER XVII.
THE RING-SIDE.


OUT of the whole of that vast multitude I was one of the very few who had
observed whence it was that this black hat, skimming so opportunely over
the ropes, had come.  I have already remarked that when we looked around
us there had been a single gig travelling very rapidly upon the southern
road.  My uncle�s eyes had rested upon it, but his attention had been
drawn away by the discussion between Sir Lothian Hume and the referee
upon the question of time.  For my own part, I had been so struck by the
furious manner in which these belated travellers were approaching, that I
had continued to watch them with all sorts of vague hopes within me,
which I did not dare to put into words for fear of adding to my uncle�s
disappointments.  I had just made out that the gig contained a man and a
woman, when suddenly I saw it swerve off the road, and come with a
galloping horse and bounding wheels right across the moor, crashing
through the gorse bushes, and sinking down to the hubs in the heather and
bracken.  As the driver pulled up his foam-spattered horse, he threw the
reins to his companion, sprang from his seat, butted furiously into the
crowd, and then an instant afterwards up went the hat which told of his
challenge and defiance.

�There is no hurry now, I presume, Craven,� said my uncle, as coolly as
if this sudden effect had been carefully devised by him.

�Now that your man has his hat in the ring you can take as much time as
you like, Sir Charles.�

�Your friend has certainly cut it rather fine, nephew.�

�It is not Jim, sir,� I whispered.  �It is some one else.�

My uncle�s eyebrows betrayed his astonishment.

�Some one else!� he ejaculated.

�And a good man too!� roared Belcher, slapping his thigh with a crack
like a pistol-shot.  �Why, blow my dickey if it ain�t old Jack Harrison
himself!�

Looking down at the crowd, we had seen the head and shoulders of a
powerful and strenuous man moving slowly forward, and leaving behind him
a long V-shaped ripple upon its surface like the wake of a swimming dog.
Now, as he pushed his way through the looser fringe the head was raised,
and there was the grinning, hardy face of the smith looking up at us.  He
had left his hat in the ring, and was enveloped in an overcoat with a
blue bird�s-eye handkerchief tied round his neck.  As he emerged from the
throng he let his great-coat fly loose, and showed that he was dressed in
his full fighting kit�black drawers, chocolate stockings, and white
shoes.

�I�m right sorry to be so late, Sir Charles,� he cried.  �I�d have been
sooner, but it took me a little time to make it all straight with the
missus.  I couldn�t convince her all at once, an� so I brought her with
me, and we argued it out on the way.�

Looking at the gig, I saw that it was indeed Mrs. Harrison who was seated
in it.  Sir Charles beckoned him up to the wheel of the curricle.

�What in the world brings you here, Harrison?� he whispered.  �I am as
glad to see you as ever I was to see a man in my life, but I confess that
I did not expect you.�

�Well, sir, you heard I was coming,� said the smith.

�Indeed, I did not.�

�Didn�t you get a message, Sir Charles, from a man named Cumming,
landlord of the Friar�s Oak Inn?  Mister Rodney there would know him.�

�We saw him dead drunk at the George.�

�There, now, if I wasn�t afraid of it!� cried Harrison, angrily.  �He�s
always like that when he�s excited, and I never saw a man more off his
head than he was when he heard I was going to take this job over.  He
brought a bag of sovereigns up with him to back me with.�

�That�s how the betting got turned,� said my uncle.  �He found others to
follow his lead, it appears.�

�I was so afraid that he might get upon the drink that I made him promise
to go straight to you, sir, the very instant he should arrive.  He had a
note to deliver.�

�I understand that he reached the George at six, whilst I did not return
from Reigate until after seven, by which time I have no doubt that he had
drunk his message to me out of his head.  But where is your nephew Jim,
and how did you come to know that you would be needed?�

�It is not his fault, I promise you, that you should be left in the
lurch.  As to me, I had my orders to take his place from the only man
upon earth whose word I have never disobeyed.�

�Yes, Sir Charles,� said Mrs. Harrison, who had left the gig and
approached us.  �You can make the most of it this time, for never again
shall you have my Jack�not if you were to go on your knees for him.�

�She�s not a patron of sport, and that�s a fact,� said the smith.

�Sport!� she cried, with shrill contempt and anger.  �Tell me when all is
over.�

She hurried away, and I saw her afterwards seated amongst the bracken,
her back turned towards the multitude, and her hands over her ears,
cowering and wincing in an agony of apprehension.

Whilst this hurried scene had been taking place, the crowd had become
more and more tumultuous, partly from their impatience at the delay, and
partly from their exuberant spirits at the unexpected chance of seeing so
celebrated a fighting man as Harrison.  His identity had already been
noised abroad, and many an elderly connoisseur plucked his long net-purse
out of his fob, in order to put a few guineas upon the man who would
represent the school of the past against the present.  The younger men
were still in favour of the west-countryman, and small odds were to be
had either way in proportion to the number of the supporters of each in
the different parts of the crowd.

In the mean time Sir Lothian Hume had come bustling up to the Honourable
Berkeley Craven, who was still standing near our curricle.

�I beg to lodge a formal protest against these proceedings,� said he.

�On what grounds, sir?�

�Because the man produced is not the original nominee of Sir Charles
Tregellis.�

�I never named one, as you are well aware,� said my uncle.

�The betting has all been upon the understanding that young Jim Harrison
was my man�s opponent.  Now, at the last moment, he is withdrawn and
another and more formidable man put into his place.�

�Sir Charles Tregellis is quite within his rights,� said Craven, firmly.
�He undertook to produce a man who should be within the age limits
stipulated, and I understand that Harrison fulfils all the conditions.
You are over five-and-thirty, Harrison?�

�Forty-one next month, master.�

�Very good.  I direct that the fight proceed.�

But alas! there was one authority which was higher even than that of the
referee, and we were destined to an experience which was the prelude, and
sometimes the conclusion, also, of many an old-time fight.  Across the
moor there had ridden a black-coated gentleman, with buff-topped
hunting-boots and a couple of grooms behind him, the little knot of
horsemen showing up clearly upon the curving swells and then dipping down
into the alternate hollows.  Some of the more observant of the crowd had
glanced suspiciously at this advancing figure, but the majority had not
observed him at all until he reined up his horse upon a knoll which
overlooked the amphitheatre, and in a stentorian voice announced that he
represented the _Custos rotulorum_ of His Majesty�s county of Sussex,
that he proclaimed this assembly to be gathered together for an illegal
purpose, and that he was commissioned to disperse it by force, if
necessary.

Never before had I understood that deep-seated fear and wholesome respect
which many centuries of bludgeoning at the hands of the law had beaten
into the fierce and turbulent natives of these islands.  Here was a man
with two attendants upon one side, and on the other thirty thousand very
angry and disappointed people, many of them fighters by profession, and
some from the roughest and most dangerous classes in the country.  And
yet it was the single man who appealed confidently to force, whilst the
huge multitude swayed and murmured like a mutinous fierce-willed creature
brought face to face with a power against which it knew that there was
neither argument nor resistance.  My uncle, however, with Berkeley
Craven, Sir John Lade, and a dozen other lords and gentlemen, hurried
across to the interrupter of the sport.

�I presume that you have a warrant, sir?� said Craven.

�Yes, sir, I have a warrant.�

�Then I have a legal right to inspect it.�

The magistrate handed him a blue paper which the little knot of gentlemen
clustered their heads over, for they were mostly magistrates themselves,
and were keenly alive to any possible flaw in the wording.  At last
Craven shrugged his shoulders, and handed it back.

�This seems to be correct, sir,� said he.

�It is entirely correct,� answered the magistrate, affably.  �To prevent
waste of your valuable time, gentlemen, I may say, once for all, that it
is my unalterable determination that no fight shall, under any
circumstances, be brought off in the county over which I have control,
and I am prepared to follow you all day in order to prevent it.�

To my inexperience this appeared to bring the whole matter to a
conclusion, but I had underrated the foresight of those who arrange these
affairs, and also the advantages which made Crawley Down so favourite a
rendezvous.  There was a hurried consultation between the principals, the
backers, the referee, and the timekeeper.

�It�s seven miles to Hampshire border and about two to Surrey,� said
Jackson.  The famous Master of the Ring was clad in honour of the
occasion in a most resplendent scarlet coat worked in gold at the
buttonholes, a white stock, a looped hat with a broad black band, buff
knee-breeches, white silk stockings, and paste buckles�a costume which
did justice to his magnificent figure, and especially to those famous
�balustrade� calves which had helped him to be the finest runner and
jumper as well as the most formidable pugilist in England.  His hard,
high-boned face, large piercing eyes, and immense physique made him a
fitting leader for that rough and tumultuous body who had named him as
their commander-in-chief.

�If I might venture to offer you a word of advice,� said the affable
official, �it would be to make for the Hampshire line, for Sir James
Ford, on the Surrey border, has as great an objection to such assemblies
as I have, whilst Mr. Merridew, of Long Hall, who is the Hampshire
magistrate, has fewer scruples upon the point.�

�Sir,� said my uncle, raising his hat in his most impressive manner, �I
am infinitely obliged to you.  With the referee�s permission, there is
nothing for it but to shift the stakes.�

In an instant a scene of the wildest animation had set in.  Tom Owen and
his assistant, Fogo, with the help of the ring-keepers, plucked up the
stakes and ropes, and carried them off across country.  Crab Wilson was
enveloped in great coats, and borne away in the barouche, whilst Champion
Harrison took Mr. Craven�s place in our curricle.  Then, off the huge
crowd started, horsemen, vehicles, and pedestrians, rolling slowly over
the broad face of the moorland.  The carriages rocked and pitched like
boats in a seaway, as they lumbered along, fifty abreast, scrambling and
lurching over everything which came in their way.  Sometimes, with a snap
and a thud, one axle would come to the ground, whilst a wheel reeled off
amidst the tussocks of heather, and roars of delight greeted the owners
as they looked ruefully at the ruin.  Then as the gorse clumps grew
thinner, and the sward more level, those on foot began to run, the riders
struck in their spurs, the drivers cracked their whips, and away they all
streamed in the maddest, wildest cross-country steeplechase, the yellow
barouche and the crimson curricle, which held the two champions, leading
the van.

�What do you think of your chances, Harrison?� I heard my uncle ask, as
the two mares picked their way over the broken ground.

�It�s my last fight, Sir Charles,� said the smith.  �You heard the missus
say that if she let me off this time I was never to ask again.  I must
try and make it a good one.�

�But your training?�

�I�m always in training, sir.  I work hard from morning to night, and I
drink little else than water.  I don�t think that Captain Barclay can do
much better with all his rules.�

�He�s rather long in the reach for you.�

�I�ve fought and beat them that were longer.  If it comes to a rally I
should hold my own, and I should have the better of him at a throw.�

�It�s a match of youth against experience.  Well, I would not hedge a
guinea of my money.  But, unless he was acting under force, I cannot
forgive young Jim for having deserted me.�

�He _was_ acting under force, Sir Charles.�

�You have seen him, then?�

�No, master, I have not seen him.�

�You know where he is?�

�Well, it is not for me to say one way or the other.  I can only tell you
that he could not help himself.  But here�s the beak a-comin� for us
again.�

The ominous figure galloped up once more alongside of our curricle, but
this time his mission was a more amiable one.

�My jurisdiction ends at that ditch, sir,� said he.  �I should fancy that
you could hardly wish a better place for a mill than the sloping field
beyond.  I am quite sure that no one will interfere with you there.�

His anxiety that the fight should be brought off was in such contrast to
the zeal with which he had chased us from his county, that my uncle could
not help remarking upon it.

�It is not for a magistrate to wink at the breaking of the law, sir,� he
answered.  �But if my colleague of Hampshire has no scruples about its
being brought off within his jurisdiction, I should very much like to see
the fight,� with which he spurred his horse up an adjacent knoll, from
which he thought that he might gain the best view of the proceedings.

And now I had a view of all those points of etiquette and curious
survivals of custom which are so recent, that we have not yet appreciated
that they may some day be as interesting to the social historian as they
then were to the sportsman.  A dignity was given to the contest by a
rigid code of ceremony, just as the clash of mail-clad knights was
prefaced and adorned by the calling of the heralds and the showing of
blazoned shields.  To many in those ancient days the tourney may have
seemed a bloody and brutal ordeal, but we who look at it with ample
perspective see that it was a rude but gallant preparation for the
conditions of life in an iron age.  And so also, when the ring has become
as extinct as the lists, we may understand that a broader philosophy
would show that all things, which spring up so naturally and
spontaneously, have a function to fulfil, and that it is a less evil that
two men should, of their own free will, fight until they can fight no
more than that the standard of hardihood and endurance should run the
slightest risk of being lowered in a nation which depends so largely upon
the individual qualities of her citizens for her defence.  Do away with
war, if the cursed thing can by any wit of man be avoided, but until you
see your way to that, have a care in meddling with those primitive
qualities to which at any moment you may have to appeal for your own
protection.

Tom Owen and his singular assistant, Fogo, who combined the functions of
prize-fighter and of poet, though, fortunately for himself, he could use
his fists better than his pen, soon had the ring arranged according to
the rules then in vogue.  The white wooden posts, each with the P.C. of
the pugilistic club printed upon it, were so fixed as to leave a square
of 24 feet within the roped enclosure.  Outside this ring an outer one
was pitched, eight feet separating the two.  The inner was for the
combatants and for their seconds, while in the outer there were places
for the referee, the timekeeper, the backers, and a few select and
fortunate individuals, of whom, through being in my uncle�s company, I
was one.  Some twenty well-known prize-fighters, including my friend Bill
Warr, Black Richmond, Maddox, The Pride of Westminster, Tom Belcher,
Paddington Jones, Tough Tom Blake, Symonds the ruffian, Tyne the tailor,
and others, were stationed in the outer ring as beaters.  These fellows
all wore the high white hats which were at that time much affected by the
fancy, and they were armed with horse-whips, silver-mounted, and each
bearing the P.C. monogram.  Did any one, be it East End rough or West End
patrician, intrude within the outer ropes, this corp of guardians neither
argued nor expostulated, but they fell upon the offender and laced him
with their whips until he escaped back out of the forbidden ground.  Even
with so formidable a guard and such fierce measures, the beaters-out, who
had to check the forward heaves of a maddened, straining crowd, were
often as exhausted at the end of a fight as the principals themselves.
In the mean time they formed up in a line of sentinels, presenting under
their row of white hats every type of fighting face, from the fresh
boyish countenances of Tom Belcher, Jones, and the other younger
recruits, to the scarred and mutilated visages of the veteran bruisers.

Whilst the business of the fixing of the stakes and the fastening of the
ropes was going forward, I from my place of vantage could hear the talk
of the crowd behind me, the front two rows of which were lying upon the
grass, the next two kneeling, and the others standing in serried ranks
all up the side of the gently sloping hill, so that each line could just
see over the shoulders of that which was in front.  There were several,
and those amongst the most experienced, who took the gloomiest view of
Harrison�s chances, and it made my heart heavy to overhear them.

�It�s the old story over again,� said one.  �They won�t bear in mind that
youth will be served.  They only learn wisdom when it�s knocked into
them.�

�Ay, ay,� responded another.  �That�s how Jack Slack thrashed Boughton,
and I myself saw Hooper, the tinman, beat to pieces by the fighting
oilman.  They all come to it in time, and now it�s Harrison�s turn.�

�Don�t you be so sure about that!� cried a third.  �I�ve seen Jack
Harrison fight five times, and I never yet saw him have the worse of it.
He�s a slaughterer, and so I tell you.�

�He was, you mean.�

�Well, I don�t see no such difference as all that comes to, and I�m
putting ten guineas on my opinion.�

�Why,� said a loud, consequential man from immediately behind me,
speaking with a broad western burr, �vrom what I�ve zeen of this young
Gloucester lad, I doan�t think Harrison could have stood bevore him for
ten rounds when he vas in his prime.  I vas coming up in the Bristol
coach yesterday, and the guard he told me that he had vifteen thousand
pound in hard gold in the boot that had been zent up to back our man.�

�They�ll be in luck if they see their money again,� said another.
�Harrison�s no lady�s-maid fighter, and he�s blood to the bone.  He�d
have a shy at it if his man was as big as Carlton House.�

�Tut,� answered the west-countryman.  �It�s only in Bristol and
Gloucester that you can get men to beat Bristol and Gloucester.�

�It�s like your damned himpudence to say so,� said an angry voice from
the throng behind him.  �There are six men in London that would hengage
to walk round the best twelve that hever came from the west.�

The proceedings might have opened by an impromptu bye-battle between the
indignant cockney and the gentleman from Bristol, but a prolonged roar of
applause broke in upon their altercation.  It was caused by the
appearance in the ring of Crab Wilson, followed by Dutch Sam and Mendoza
carrying the basin, sponge, brandy-bladder, and other badges of their
office.  As he entered Wilson pulled the canary-yellow handkerchief from
his waist, and going to the corner post, he tied it to the top of it,
where it remained fluttering in the breeze.  He then took a bundle of
smaller ribands of the same colour from his seconds, and walking round,
he offered them to the noblemen and Corinthians at half-a-guinea apiece
as souvenirs of the fight.  His brisk trade was only brought to an end by
the appearance of Harrison, who climbed in a very leisurely manner over
the ropes, as befitted his more mature years and less elastic joints.
The yell which greeted him was even more enthusiastic than that which had
heralded Wilson, and there was a louder ring of admiration in it, for the
crowd had already had their opportunity of seeing Wilson�s physique,
whilst Harrison�s was a surprise to them.

I had often looked upon the mighty arms and neck of the smith, but I had
never before seen him stripped to the waist, or understood the marvellous
symmetry of development which had made him in his youth the favourite
model of the London sculptors.  There was none of that white sleek skin
and shimmering play of sinew which made Wilson a beautiful picture, but
in its stead there was a rugged grandeur of knotted and tangled muscle,
as though the roots of some old tree were writhing from breast to
shoulder, and from shoulder to elbow.  Even in repose the sun threw
shadows from the curves of his skin, but when he exerted himself every
muscle bunched itself up, distinct and hard, breaking his whole trunk
into gnarled knots of sinew.  His skin, on face and body, was darker and
harsher than that of his youthful antagonist, but he looked tougher and
harder, an effect which was increased by the sombre colour of his
stockings and breeches.  He entered the ring, sucking a lemon, with Jim
Belcher and Caleb Baldwin, the coster, at his heels.  Strolling across to
the post, he tied his blue bird�s-eye handkerchief over the
west-countryman�s yellow, and then walked to his opponent with his hand
out.

�I hope I see you well, Wilson,� said he.

�Pretty tidy, I thank you,� answered the other.  �We�ll speak to each
other in a different vashion, I �spects, afore we part.�

�But no ill-feeling,� said the smith, and the two fighting men grinned at
each other as they took their own corners.

�May I ask, Mr. Referee, whether these two men have been weighed?� asked
Sir Lothian Hume, standing up in the outer ring.

�Their weight has just been taken under my supervision, sir,� answered
Mr. Craven.  �Your man brought the scale down at thirteen-three, and
Harrison at thirteen-eight.�

�He�s a fifteen-stoner from the loins upwards,� cried Dutch Sam, from his
corner.

�We�ll get some of it off him before we finish.�

�You�ll get more off him than ever you bargained for,� answered Jim
Belcher, and the crowd laughed at the rough chaff.




CHAPTER XVIII.
THE SMITH�S LAST BATTLE.


�CLEAR the outer ring!� cried Jackson, standing up beside the ropes with
a big silver watch in his hand.

�Ss-whack! ss-whack! ss-whack!� went the horse-whips�for a number of the
spectators, either driven onwards by the pressure behind or willing to
risk some physical pain on the chance of getting a better view, had crept
under the ropes and formed a ragged fringe within the outer ring.  Now,
amidst roars of laughter from the crowd and a shower of blows from the
beaters-out, they dived madly back, with the ungainly haste of frightened
sheep blundering through a gap in their hurdles.  Their case was a hard
one, for the folk in front refused to yield an inch of their places�but
the arguments from the rear prevailed over everything else, and presently
every frantic fugitive had been absorbed, whilst the beaters-out took
their stands along the edge at regular intervals, with their whips held
down by their thighs.

�Gentlemen,� cried Jackson, again, �I am requested to inform you that Sir
Charles Tregellis�s nominee is Jack Harrison, fighting at thirteen-eight,
and Sir Lothian Hume�s is Crab Wilson, at thirteen-three.  No person can
be allowed at the inner ropes save the referee and the timekeeper.  I
have only to beg that, if the occasion should require it, you will all
give me your assistance to keep the ground clear, to prevent confusion,
and to have a fair fight.  All ready?�

�All ready!� from both corners.

�Time!�

There was a breathless hush as Harrison, Wilson, Belcher, and Dutch Sam
walked very briskly into the centre of the ring.  The two men shook
hands, whilst their seconds did the same, the four hands crossing each
other.  Then the seconds dropped back, and the two champions stood toe to
toe, with their hands up.

It was a magnificent sight to any one who had not lost his sense of
appreciation of the noblest of all the works of Nature.  Both men
fulfilled that requisite of the powerful athlete that they should look
larger without their clothes than with them.  In ring slang, they buffed
well.  And each showed up the other�s points on account of the extreme
contrast between them: the long, loose-limbed, deer-footed youngster, and
the square-set, rugged veteran with his trunk like the stump of an oak.
The betting began to rise upon the younger man from the instant that they
were put face to face, for his advantages were obvious, whilst those
qualities which had brought Harrison to the top in his youth were only a
memory in the minds of the older men.  All could see the three inches
extra of height and two of reach which Wilson possessed, and a glance at
the quick, cat-like motions of his feet, and the perfect poise of his
body upon his legs, showed how swiftly he could spring either in or out
from his slower adversary.  But it took a subtler insight to read the
grim smile which flickered over the smith�s mouth, or the smouldering
fire which shone in his grey eyes, and it was only the old-timers who
knew that, with his mighty heart and his iron frame, he was a perilous
man to lay odds against.

Wilson stood in the position from which he had derived his nickname, his
left hand and left foot well to the front, his body sloped very far back
from his loins, and his guard thrown across his chest, but held well
forward in a way which made him exceedingly hard to get at.  The smith,
on the other hand, assumed the obsolete attitude which Humphries and
Mendoza introduced, but which had not for ten years been seen in a
first-class battle.  Both his knees were slightly bent, he stood square
to his opponent, and his two big brown fists were held over his mark so
that he could lead equally with either.  Wilson�s hands, which moved
incessantly in and out, had been stained with some astringent juice with
the purpose of preventing them from puffing, and so great was the
contrast between them and his white forearms, that I imagined that he was
wearing dark, close-fitting gloves until my uncle explained the matter in
a whisper.  So they stood in a quiver of eagerness and expectation,
whilst that huge multitude hung so silently and breathlessly upon every
motion that they might have believed themselves to be alone, man to man,
in the centre of some primeval solitude.

It was evident from the beginning that Crab Wilson meant to throw no
chance away, and that he would trust to his lightness of foot and
quickness of hand until he should see something of the tactics of this
rough-looking antagonist.  He paced swiftly round several times, with
little, elastic, menacing steps, whilst the smith pivoted slowly to
correspond.  Then, as Wilson took a backward step to induce Harrison to
break his ground and follow him, the older man grinned and shook his
head.

�You must come to me, lad,� said he.  �I�m too old to scamper round the
ring after you.  But we have the day before us, and I�ll wait.�

He may not have expected his invitation to be so promptly answered; but
in an instant, with a panther spring, the west-countryman was on him.
Smack! smack! smack!  Thud! thud!  The first three were on Harrison�s
face, the last two were heavy counters upon Wilson�s body.  Back danced
the youngster, disengaging himself in beautiful style, but with two angry
red blotches over the lower line of his ribs.  �Blood for Wilson!� yelled
the crowd, and as the smith faced round to follow the movements of his
nimble adversary, I saw with a thrill that his chin was crimson and
dripping.  In came Wilson again with a feint at the mark and a flush hit
on Harrison�s cheek; then, breaking the force of the smith�s ponderous
right counter, he brought the round to a conclusion by slipping down upon
the grass.

�First knock-down for Harrison!� roared a thousand voices, for ten times
as many pounds would change hands upon the point.

�I appeal to the referee!� cried Sir Lothian Hume.  �It was a slip, and
not a knock-down.�

�I give it a slip,� said Berkeley Craven, and the men walked to their
corners, amidst a general shout of applause for a spirited and
well-contested opening round.  Harrison fumbled in his mouth with his
finger and thumb, and then with a sharp half-turn he wrenched out a
tooth, which he threw into the basin.  �Quite like old times,� said he to
Belcher.

�Have a care, Jack!� whispered the anxious second.  �You got rather more
than you gave.�

�Maybe I can carry more, too,� said he serenely, whilst Caleb Baldwin
mopped the big sponge over his face, and the shining bottom of the tin
basin ceased suddenly to glimmer through the water.

I could gather from the comments of the experienced Corinthians around
me, and from the remarks of the crowd behind, that Harrison�s chance was
thought to have been lessened by this round.

�I�ve seen his old faults and I haven�t seen his old merits,� said Sir
John Lade, our opponent of the Brighton Road.  �He�s as slow on his feet
and with his guard as ever.  Wilson hit him as he liked.�

�Wilson may hit him three times to his once, but his one is worth
Wilson�s three,� remarked my uncle.  �He�s a natural fighter and the
other an excellent sparrer, but I don�t hedge a guinea.�

A sudden hush announced that the men were on their feet again, and so
skilfully had the seconds done their work, that neither looked a jot the
worse for what had passed.  Wilson led viciously with his left, but
misjudged his distance, receiving a smashing counter on the mark in reply
which sent him reeling and gasping to the ropes.  �Hurrah for the old
one!� yelled the mob, and my uncle laughed and nudged Sir John Lade.  The
west-countryman smiled, and shook himself like a dog from the water as
with a stealthy step he came back to the centre of the ring, where his
man was still standing.  Bang came Harrison�s right upon the mark once
more, but Crab broke the blow with his elbow, and jumped laughing away.
Both men were a little winded, and their quick, high breathing, with the
light patter of their feet as they danced round each other, blended into
one continuous, long-drawn sound.  Two simultaneous exchanges with the
left made a clap like a pistol-shot, and then as Harrison rushed in for a
fall, Wilson slipped him, and over went my old friend upon his face,
partly from the impetus of his own futile attack, and partly from a
swinging half-arm blow which the west-countryman brought home upon his
ear as he passed.

�Knock-down for Wilson,� cried the referee, and the answering roar was
like the broadside of a seventy-four.  Up went hundreds of curly brimmed
Corinthian hats into the air, and the slope before us was a bank of
flushed and yelling faces.  My heart was cramped with my fears, and I
winced at every blow, yet I was conscious also of an absolute
fascination, with a wild thrill of fierce joy and a certain exultation in
our common human nature which could rise above pain and fear in its
straining after the very humblest form of fame.

Belcher and Baldwin had pounced upon their man, and had him up and in his
corner in an instant, but, in spite of the coolness with which the hardy
smith took his punishment, there was immense exultation amongst the
west-countrymen.

�We�ve got him!  He�s beat!  He�s beat!� shouted the two Jew seconds.
�It�s a hundred to a tizzy on Gloucester!�

�Beat, is he?� answered Belcher.  �You�ll need to rent this field before
you can beat him, for he�ll stand a month of that kind of fly-flappin�.�
He was swinging a towel in front of Harrison as he spoke, whilst Baldwin
mopped him with the sponge.

�How is it with you, Harrison?� asked my uncle.

�Hearty as a buck, sir.  It�s as right as the day.�

The cheery answer came with so merry a ring that the clouds cleared from
my uncle�s face.

�You should recommend your man to lead more, Tregellis,� said Sir John
Lade.  �He�ll never win it unless he leads.�

�He knows more about the game than you or I do, Lade.  I�ll let him take
his own way.�

�The betting is three to one against him now,� said a gentleman, whose
grizzled moustache showed that he was an officer of the late war.

�Very true, General Fitzpatrick.  But you�ll observe that it is the raw
young bloods who are giving the odds, and the Sheenies who are taking
them.  I still stick to my opinion.�

The two men came briskly up to the scratch at the call of time, the smith
a little lumpy on one side of his head, but with the same good-humoured
and yet menacing smile upon his lips.  As to Wilson, he was exactly as he
had begun in appearance, but twice I saw him close his lips sharply as if
he were in a sudden spasm of pain, and the blotches over his ribs were
darkening from scarlet to a sullen purple.  He held his guard somewhat
lower to screen this vulnerable point, and he danced round his opponent
with a lightness which showed that his wind had not been impaired by the
body-blows, whilst the smith still adopted the impassive tactics with
which he had commenced.

Many rumours had come up to us from the west as to Crab Wilson�s fine
science and the quickness of his hitting, but the truth surpassed what
had been expected of him.  In this round and the two which followed he
showed a swiftness and accuracy which old ringsiders declared that
Mendoza in his prime had never surpassed.  He was in and out like
lightning, and his blows were heard and felt rather than seen.  But
Harrison still took them all with the same dogged smile, occasionally
getting in a hard body-blow in return, for his adversary�s height and his
position combined to keep his face out of danger.  At the end of the
fifth round the odds were four to one, and the west-countrymen were
riotous in their exultation.

�What think you now?� cried the west-countryman behind me, and in his
excitement he could get no further save to repeat over and over again,
�What think you now?�  When in the sixth round the smith was peppered
twice without getting in a counter, and had the worst of the fall as
well, the fellow became inarticulate altogether, and could only huzza
wildly in his delight.  Sir Lothian Hume was smiling and nodding his
head, whilst my uncle was coldly impassive, though I was sure that his
heart was as heavy as mine.

�This won�t do, Tregellis,� said General Fitzpatrick.  �My money is on
the old one, but the other is the finer boxer.�

�My man is _un peu pass�_, but he will come through all right,� answered
my uncle.

I saw that both Belcher and Baldwin were looking grave, and I knew that
we must have a change of some sort, or the old tale of youth and age
would be told once more.

The seventh round, however, showed the reserve strength of the hardy old
fighter, and lengthened the faces of those layers of odds who had
imagined that the fight was practically over, and that a few finishing
rounds would have given the smith his _coup-de-gr�ce_.  It was clear when
the two men faced each other that Wilson had made himself up for
mischief, and meant to force the fighting and maintain the lead which he
had gained, but that grey gleam was not quenched yet in the veteran�s
eyes, and still the same smile played over his grim face.  He had become
more jaunty, too, in the swing of his shoulders and the poise of his
head, and it brought my confidence back to see the brisk way in which he
squared up to his man.

Wilson led with his left, but was short, and he only just avoided a
dangerous right-hander which whistled in at his ribs.  �Bravo, old �un,
one of those will be a dose of laudanum if you get it home,� cried
Belcher.  There was a pause of shuffling feet and hard breathing, broken
by the thud of a tremendous body blow from Wilson, which the smith
stopped with the utmost coolness.  Then again a few seconds of silent
tension, when Wilson led viciously at the head, but Harrison took it on
his forearm, smiling and nodding at his opponent.  �Get the pepper-box
open!� yelled Mendoza, and Wilson sprang in to carry out his
instructions, but was hit out again by a heavy drive on the chest.
�Now�s the time!  Follow it up!� cried Belcher, and in rushed the smith,
pelting in his half-arm blows, and taking the returns without a wince,
until Crab Wilson went down exhausted in the corner.  Both men had their
marks to show, but Harrison had all the best of the rally, so it was our
turn to throw our hats into the air and to shout ourselves hoarse, whilst
the seconds clapped their man upon his broad back as they hurried him to
his corner.

�What think you now?� shouted all the neighbours of the west-countryman,
repeating his own refrain.

�Why, Dutch Sam never put in a better rally,� cried Sir John Lade.
�What�s the betting now, Sir Lothian?�

�I have laid all that I intend; but I don�t think my man can lose it.�
For all that, the smile had faded from his face, and I observed that he
glanced continually over his shoulder into the crowd behind him.

A sullen purple cloud had been drifting slowly up from the
south-west�though I dare say that out of thirty thousand folk there were
very few who had spared the time or attention to mark it.  Now it
suddenly made its presence apparent by a few heavy drops of rain,
thickening rapidly into a sharp shower, which filled the air with its
hiss, and rattled noisily upon the high, hard hats of the Corinthians.
Coat-collars were turned up and handkerchiefs tied round necks, whilst
the skins of the two men glistened with the moisture as they stood up to
each other once more.  I noticed that Belcher whispered very earnestly
into Harrison�s ear as he rose from his knee, and that the smith nodded
his head curtly, with the air of a man who understands and approves of
his orders.

And what those orders were was instantly apparent.  Harrison was to be
turned from the defender into the attacker.  The result of the rally in
the last round had convinced his seconds that when it came to
give-and-take hitting, their hardy and powerful man was likely to have
the better of it.  And then on the top of this came the rain.  With the
slippery grass the superior activity of Wilson would be neutralized, and
he would find it harder to avoid the rushes of his opponent.  It was in
taking advantage of such circumstances that the art of ringcraft lay, and
many a shrewd and vigilant second had won a losing battle for his man.
�Go in, then!  Go in!� whooped the two prize-fighters, while every backer
in the crowd took up the roar.

And Harrison went in, in such fashion that no man who saw him do it will
ever forget it.  Crab Wilson, as game as a pebble, met him with a flush
hit every time, but no human strength or human science seemed capable of
stopping the terrible onslaught of this iron man.  Round after round he
scrambled his way in, slap-bang, right and left, every hit tremendously
sent home.  Sometimes he covered his own face with his left, and
sometimes he disdained to use any guard at all, but his springing hits
were irresistible.  The rain lashed down upon them, pouring from their
faces and running in crimson trickles over their bodies, but neither gave
any heed to it save to man�uvre always with the view of bringing it in to
each other�s eyes.  But round after round the west-countryman fell, and
round after round the betting rose, until the odds were higher in our
favour than ever they had been against us.  With a sinking heart, filled
with pity and admiration for these two gallant men, I longed that every
bout might be the last, and yet the �Time!� was hardly out of Jackson�s
mouth before they had both sprung from their second�s knees, with
laughter upon their mutilated faces and chaffing words upon their
bleeding lips.  It may have been a humble object-lesson, but I give you
my word that many a time in my life I have braced myself to a hard task
by the remembrance of that morning upon Crawley Downs, asking myself if
my manhood were so weak that I would not do for my country, or for those
whom I loved, as much as these two would endure for a paltry stake and
for their own credit amongst their fellows.  Such a spectacle may
brutalize those who are brutal, but I say that there is a spiritual side
to it also, and that the sight of the utmost human limit of endurance and
courage is one which bears a lesson of its own.

But if the ring can breed bright virtues, it is but a partisan who can
deny that it can be the mother of black vices also, and we were destined
that morning to have a sight of each.  It so chanced that, as the battle
went against his man, my eyes stole round very often to note the
expression upon Sir Lothian Hume�s face, for I knew how fearlessly he had
laid the odds, and I understood that his fortunes as well as his champion
were going down before the smashing blows of the old bruiser.  The
confident smile with which he had watched the opening rounds had long
vanished from his lips, and his cheeks had turned of a sallow pallor,
whilst his small, fierce grey eyes looked furtively from under his craggy
brows, and more than once he burst into savage imprecations when Wilson
was beaten to the ground.  But especially I noticed that his chin was
always coming round to his shoulder, and that at the end of every round
he sent keen little glances flying backwards into the crowd.  For some
time, amidst the immense hillside of faces which banked themselves up on
the slope behind us, I was unable to pick out the exact point at which
his gaze was directed.  But at last I succeeded in following it.  A very
tall man, who showed a pair of broad, bottle-green shoulders high above
his neighbours, was looking very hard in our direction, and I assured
myself that a quick exchange of almost imperceptible signals was going on
between him and the Corinthian baronet.  I became conscious, also, as I
watched this stranger, that the cluster of men around him were the
roughest elements of the whole assembly: fierce, vicious-looking fellows,
with cruel, debauched faces, who howled like a pack of wolves at every
blow, and yelled execrations at Harrison whenever he walked across to his
corner.  So turbulent were they that I saw the ringkeepers whisper
together and glance up in their direction, as if preparing for trouble in
store, but none of them had realized how near it was to breaking out, or
how dangerous it might prove.

Thirty rounds had been fought in an hour and twenty-five minutes, and the
rain was pelting down harder than ever.  A thick steam rose from the two
fighters, and the ring was a pool of mud.  Repeated falls had turned the
men brown, with a horrible mottling of crimson blotches.  Round after
round had ended by Crab Wilson going down, and it was evident, even to my
inexperienced eyes, that he was weakening rapidly.  He leaned heavily
upon the two Jews when they led him to his corner, and he reeled when
their support was withdrawn.  Yet his science had, through long practice,
become an automatic thing with him, so that he stopped and hit with less
power, but with as great accuracy as ever.  Even now a casual observer
might have thought that he had the best of the battle, for the smith was
far the more terribly marked, but there was a wild stare in the
west-countryman�s eyes, and a strange catch in his breathing, which told
us that it is not the most dangerous blow which shows upon the surface.
A heavy cross-buttock at the end of the thirty-first round shook the
breath from his body, and he came up for the thirty-second with the same
jaunty gallantry as ever, but with the dazed expression of a man whose
wind has been utterly smashed.

�He�s got the roly-polies,� cried Belcher.  �You have it your own way
now!�

�I�ll vight for a week yet,� gasped Wilson.

�Damme, I like his style,� cried Sir John Lade.  �No shifting, nothing
shy, no hugging nor hauling.  It�s a shame to let him fight.  Take the
brave fellow away!�

�Take him away!  Take him away!� echoed a hundred voices.

�I won�t be taken away!  Who dares say so?� cried Wilson, who was back,
after another fall, upon his second�s knee.

�His heart won�t suffer him to cry enough,� said General Fitzpatrick.
�As his patron, Sir Lothian, you should direct the sponge to be thrown
up.�

�You think he can�t win it?�

�He is hopelessly beat, sir.�

�You don�t know him.  He�s a glutton of the first water.�

�A gamer man never pulled his shirt off; but the other is too strong for
him.�

�Well, sir, I believe that he can fight another ten rounds.�  He half
turned as he spoke, and I saw him throw up his left arm with a singular
gesture into the air.

�Cut the ropes!  Fair play!  Wait till the rain stops!� roared a
stentorian voice behind me, and I saw that it came from the big man with
the bottle-green coat.  His cry was a signal, for, like a thunderclap,
there came a hundred hoarse voices shouting together: �Fair play for
Gloucester!  Break the ring!  Break the ring!�

Jackson had called �Time,� and the two mud-plastered men were already
upon their feet, but the interest had suddenly changed from the fight to
the audience.  A succession of heaves from the back of the crowd had sent
a series of long ripples running through it, all the heads swaying
rhythmically in the one direction like a wheatfield in a squall.  With
every impulsion the oscillation increased, those in front trying vainly
to steady themselves against the rushes from behind, until suddenly there
came a sharp snap, two white stakes with earth clinging to their points
flew into the outer ring, and a spray of people, dashed from the solid
wave behind, were thrown against the line of the beaters-out.  Down came
the long horse-whips, swayed by the most vigorous arms in England; but
the wincing and shouting victims had no sooner scrambled back a few yards
from the merciless cuts, before a fresh charge from the rear hurled them
once more into the arms of the prize-fighters.  Many threw themselves
down upon the turf and allowed successive waves to pass over their
bodies, whilst others, driven wild by the blows, returned them with their
hunting-crops and walking-canes.  And then, as half the crowd strained to
the left and half to the right to avoid the pressure from behind, the
vast mass was suddenly reft in twain, and through the gap surged the
rough fellows from behind, all armed with loaded sticks and yelling for
�Fair play and Gloucester!�  Their determined rush carried the
prize-fighters before them, the inner ropes snapped like threads, and in
an instant the ring was a swirling,� seething mass of figures, whips and
sticks falling and clattering, whilst, face to face, in the middle of it
all, so wedged that they could neither advance nor retreat, the smith and
the west-countryman continued their long-drawn battle as oblivious of the
chaos raging round them as two bulldogs would have been who had got each
other by the throat.  The driving rain, the cursing and screams of pain,
the swish of the blows, the yelling of orders and advice, the heavy smell
of the damp cloth�every incident of that scene of my early youth comes
back to me now in my old age as clearly as if it had been but yesterday.

It was not easy for us to observe anything at the time, however, for we
were ourselves in the midst of the frantic crowd, swaying about and
carried occasionally quite off our feet, but endeavouring to keep our
places behind Jackson and Berkeley Craven, who, with sticks and whips
meeting over their heads, were still calling the rounds and
superintending the fight.

�The ring�s broken!� shouted Sir Lothian Hume.  �I appeal to the referee!
The fight is null and void.�

�You villain!� cried my uncle, hotly; �this is your doing.�

�You have already an account to answer for with me,� said Hume, with his
sinister sneer, and as he spoke he was swept by the rush of the crowd
into my uncle�s very arms.  The two men�s faces were not more than a few
inches apart, and Sir Lothian�s bold eyes had to sink before the
imperious scorn which gleamed coldly in those of my uncle.

�We will settle our accounts, never fear, though I degrade myself in
meeting such a blackleg.  What is it, Craven?�

�We shall have to declare a draw, Tregellis.�

�My man has the fight in hand.�

�I cannot help it.  I cannot attend to my duties when every moment I am
cut over with a whip or a stick.�

Jackson suddenly made a wild dash into the crowd, but returned with empty
hands and a rueful face.

�They�ve stolen my timekeeper�s watch,� he cried.  �A little cove
snatched it out of my hand.�

My uncle clapped his hand to his fob.

�Mine has gone also!� he cried.

�Draw it at once, or your man will get hurt,� said Jackson, and we saw
that as the undaunted smith stood up to Wilson for another round, a dozen
rough fellows were clustering round him with bludgeons.

�Do you consent to a draw, Sir Lothian Hume?�

�I do.�

�And you, Sir Charles?�

�Certainly not.�

�The ring is gone.�

�That is no fault of mine.�

�Well, I see no help for it.  As referee I order that the men be
withdrawn, and that the stakes be returned to their owners.�

�A draw!  A draw!� shrieked every one, and the crowd in an instant
dispersed in every direction, the pedestrians running to get a good lead
upon the London road, and the Corinthians in search of their horses and
carriages.  Harrison ran over to Wilson�s corner and shook him by the
hand.

�I hope I have not hurt you much.�

�I�m hard put to it to stand.  How are you?�

�My head�s singin� like a kettle.  It was the rain that helped me.�

�Yes, I thought I had you beat one time.  I never wish a better battle.�

�Nor me either.  Good-bye.�

And so those two brave-hearted fellows made their way amidst the yelping
roughs, like two wounded lions amidst a pack of wolves and jackals.  I
say again that, if the ring has fallen low, it is not in the main the
fault of the men who have done the fighting, but it lies at the door of
the vile crew of ring-side parasites and ruffians, who are as far below
the honest pugilist as the welsher and the blackleg are below the noble
racehorse which serves them as a pretext for their villainies.




CHAPTER XIX.
CLIFFE ROYAL.


MY uncle was humanely anxious to get Harrison to bed as soon as possible,
for the smith, although he laughed at his own injuries, had none the less
been severely punished.

�Don�t you dare ever to ask my leave to fight again, Jack Harrison,� said
his wife, as she looked ruefully at his battered face.  �Why, it�s worse
than when you beat Black Baruk; and if it weren�t for your topcoat, I
couldn�t swear you were the man who led me to the altar!  If the King of
England ask you, I�ll never let you do it more.�

�Well, old lass, I give my davy that I never will.  It�s best that I
leave fightin� before fightin� leaves me.�  He screwed up his face as he
took a sup from Sir Charles�s brandy flask.  �It�s fine liquor, sir, but
it gets into my cut lips most cruel.  Why, here�s John Cummings of the
Friars� Oak Inn, as I�m a sinner, and seekin� for a mad doctor, to judge
by the look of him!�

It was certainly a most singular figure who was approaching us over the
moor.  With the flushed, dazed face of a man who is just recovering from
recent intoxication, the landlord was tearing madly about, his hat gone,
and his hair and beard flying in the wind.  He ran in little zigzags from
one knot of people to another, whilst his peculiar appearance drew a
running fire of witticisms as he went, so that he reminded me
irresistibly of a snipe skimming along through a line of guns.  We saw
him stop for an instant by the yellow barouche, and hand something to Sir
Lothian Hume.  Then on he came again, until at last, catching sight of
us, he gave a cry of joy, and ran for us full speed with a note held out
at arm�s length.

�You�re a nice cove, too, John Cummings,� said Harrison, reproachfully.
�Didn�t I tell you not to let a drop pass your lips until you had given
your message to Sir Charles?�

�I ought to be pole-axed, I ought,� he cried in bitter repentance.  �I
asked for you, Sir Charles, as I�m a livin� man, I did, but you weren�t
there, and what with bein� so pleased at gettin� such odds when I knew
Harrison was goin� to fight, an� what with the landlord at the George
wantin� me to try his own specials, I let my senses go clean away from
me.  And now it�s only after the fight is over that I see you, Sir
Charles, an� if you lay that whip over my back, it�s only what I
deserve.�

But my uncle was paying no attention whatever to the voluble
self-reproaches of the landlord.  He had opened the note, and was reading
it with a slight raising of the eyebrows, which was almost the very
highest note in his limited emotional gamut.

�What make you of this, nephew?� he asked, handing it to me.

This was what I read�

    �SIR CHARLES TREGELLIS,

    �For God�s sake, come at once, when this reaches you, to Cliffe
    Royal, and tarry as little as possible upon the way.  You will see me
    there, and you will hear much which concerns you deeply.  I pray you
    to come as soon as may be; and until then I remain him whom you knew
    as

                                                         �JAMES HARRISON.�

�Well, nephew?� asked my uncle.

�Why, sir, I cannot tell what it may mean.�

�Who gave it to you, sirrah?�

�It was young Jim Harrison himself, sir,� said the landlord, �though
indeed I scarce knew him at first, for he looked like his own ghost.  He
was so eager that it should reach you that he would not leave me until
the horse was harnessed and I started upon my way.  There was one note
for you and one for Sir Lothian Hume, and I wish to God he had chosen a
better messenger!�

�This is a mystery indeed,� said my uncle, bending his brows over the
note.  �What should he be doing at that house of ill-omen?  And why does
he sign himself �him whom you knew as Jim Harrison?�  By what other style
should I know him?  Harrison, you can throw a light upon this.  You, Mrs.
Harrison; I see by your face that you understand it.�

�Maybe we do, Sir Charles; but we are plain folk, my Jack and I, and we
go as far as we see our way, and when we don�t see our way any longer, we
just stop.  We�ve been goin� this twenty year, but now we�ll draw aside
and let our betters get to the front; so if you wish to find what that
note means, I can only advise you to do what you are asked, and to drive
over to Cliffe Royal, where you will find out.�

My uncle put the note into his pocket.

�I don�t move until I have seen you safely in the hands of the surgeon,
Harrison.�

�Never mind for me, sir.  The missus and me can drive down to Crawley in
the gig, and a yard of stickin� plaster and a raw steak will soon set me
to rights.�

But my uncle was by no means to be persuaded, and he drove the pair into
Crawley, where the smith was left under the charge of his wife in the
very best quarters which money could procure.  Then, after a hasty
luncheon, we turned the mares� heads for the south.

�This ends my connection with the ring, nephew,� said my uncle.  �I
perceive that there is no possible means by which it can be kept pure
from roguery.  I have been cheated and befooled; but a man learns wisdom
at last, and never again do I give countenance to a prize-fight.�

Had I been older or he less formidable, I might have said what was in my
heart, and begged him to give up other things also�to come out from those
shallow circles in which he lived, and to find some work that was worthy
of his strong brain and his good heart.  But the thought had hardly
formed itself in my mind before he had dropped his serious vein, and was
chatting away about some new silver-mounted harness which he intended to
spring upon the Mall, and about the match for a thousand guineas which he
meant to make between his filly Ethelberta and Lord Doncaster�s famous
three-year-old Aurelius.

We had got as far as Whiteman�s Green, which is rather more than midway
between Crawley Down and Friars� Oak, when, looking backwards, I saw far
down the road the gleam of the sun upon a high yellow carriage.  Sir
Lothian Hume was following us.

�He has had the same summons as we, and is bound for the same
destination,� said my uncle, glancing over his shoulder at the distant
barouche.  �We are both wanted at Cliffe Royal�we, the two survivors of
that black business.  And it is Jim Harrison of all people who calls us
there.  Nephew, I have had an eventful life, but I feel as if the very
strangest scene of it were waiting for me among those trees.�

He whipped up the mares, and now from the curve of the road we could see
the high dark pinnacles of the old Manor-house shooting up above the
ancient oaks which ring it round.  The sight of it, with its bloodstained
and ghost-blasted reputation, would in itself have been enough to send a
thrill through my nerves; but when the words of my uncle made me suddenly
realize that this strange summons was indeed for the two men who were
concerned in that old-world tragedy, and that it was the playmate of my
youth who had sent it, I caught my breath as I seemed vaguely to catch a
glimpse of some portentous thing forming itself in front of us.  The
rusted gates between the crumbling heraldic pillars were folded back, and
my uncle flicked the mares impatiently as we flew up the weed-grown
avenue, until he pulled them on their haunches before the time-blotched
steps.  The front door was open, and Boy Jim was waiting there to meet
us.

But it was a different Boy Jim from him whom I had known and loved.
There was a change in him somewhere, a change so marked that it was the
first thing that I noticed, and yet so subtle that I could not put words
to it.  He was not better dressed than of old, for I well knew the old
brown suit that he wore.

He was not less comely, for his training had left him the very model of
what a man should be.  And yet there was a change, a touch of dignity in
the expression, a suggestion of confidence in the bearing which seemed,
now that it was supplied, to be the one thing which had been needed to
give him harmony and finish.

Somehow, in spite of his prowess, his old school name of �Boy� had clung
very naturally to him, until that instant when I saw him standing in his
self-contained and magnificent manhood in the doorway of the ancient
house.  A woman stood beside him, her hand resting upon his shoulder, and
I saw that it was Miss Hinton of Anstey Cross.

�You remember me, Sir Charles Tregellis,� said she, coming forward, as we
sprang down from the curricle.

My uncle looked hard at her with a puzzled face.

�I do not think that I have the privilege, madame.  And yet��

�Polly Hinton, of the Haymarket.  You surely cannot have forgotten Polly
Hinton.�

�Forgotten!  Why, we have mourned for you in Fops� Alley for more years
than I care to think of.  But what in the name of wonder��

�I was privately married, and I retired from the stage.  I want you to
forgive me for taking Jim away from you last night.�

�It was you, then?�

�I had a stronger claim even than you could have.  You were his patron; I
was his mother.�  She drew his head down to hers as she spoke, and there,
with their cheeks together, were the two faces, the one stamped with the
waning beauty of womanhood, the other with the waxing strength of man,
and yet so alike in the dark eyes, the blue-black hair and the broad
white brow, that I marvelled that I had never read her secret on the
first days that I had seen them together.  �Yes,� she cried, �he is my
own boy, and he saved me from what is worse than death, as your nephew
Rodney could tell you.  Yet my lips were sealed, and it was only last
night that I could tell him that it was his mother whom he had brought
back by his gentleness and his patience into the sweetness of life.�

�Hush, mother!� said Jim, turning his lips to her cheek.  �There are some
things which are between ourselves.  But tell me, Sir Charles, how went
the fight?�

�Your uncle would have won it, but the roughs broke the ring.�

�He is no uncle of mine, Sir Charles, but he has been the best and truest
friend, both to me and to my father, that ever the world could offer.  I
only know one as true,� he continued, taking me by the hand, �and dear
old Rodney Stone is his name.  But I trust he was not much hurt?�

�A week or two will set him right.  But I cannot pretend to understand
how this matter stands, and you must allow me to say that I have not
heard you advance anything yet which seems to me to justify you in
abandoning your engagements at a moment�s notice.�

�Come in, Sir Charles, and I am convinced that you will acknowledge that
I could not have done otherwise.  But here, if I mistake not, is Sir
Lothian Hume.�

The yellow barouche had swung into the avenue, and a few moments later
the weary, panting horses had pulled up behind our curricle.  Sir Lothian
sprang out, looking as black as a thunder-cloud.

�Stay where you are, Corcoran,� said he; and I caught a glimpse of a
bottle-green coat which told me who was his travelling companion.
�Well,� he continued, looking round him with an insolent stare, �I should
vastly like to know who has had the insolence to give me so pressing an
invitation to visit my own house, and what in the devil you mean by
daring to trespass upon my grounds?�

�I promise you that you will understand this and a good deal more before
we part, Sir Lothian,� said Jim, with a curious smile playing over his
face.  �If you will follow me, I will endeavour to make it all clear to
you.�

With his mother�s hand in his own, he led us into that ill-omened room
where the cards were still heaped upon the sideboard, and the dark shadow
lurked in the corner of the ceiling.

�Now, sirrah, your explanation!� cried Sir Lothian, standing with his
arms folded by the door.

�My first explanations I owe to you, Sir Charles,� said Jim; and as I
listened to his voice and noted his manner, I could not but admire the
effect which the company of her whom he now knew to be his mother had had
upon a rude country lad.  �I wish to tell you what occurred last night.�

�I will tell it for you, Jim,� said his mother.  �You must know, Sir
Charles, that though my son knew nothing of his parents, we were both
alive, and had never lost sight of him.  For my part, I let him have his
own way in going to London and in taking up this challenge.  It was only
yesterday that it came to the ears of his father, who would have none of
it.  He was in the weakest health, and his wishes were not to be
gainsayed.  He ordered me to go at once and to bring his son to his side.
I was at my wit�s end, for I was sure that Jim would never come unless a
substitute were provided for him.  I went to the kind, good couple who
had brought him up, and I told them how matters stood.  Mrs. Harrison
loved Jim as if he had been her own son, and her husband loved mine, so
they came to my help, and may God bless them for their kindness to a
distracted wife and mother!  Harrison would take Jim�s place if Jim would
go to his father.  Then I drove to Crawley.  I found out which was Jim�s
room, and I spoke to him through the window, for I was sure that those
who had backed him would not let him go.  I told him that I was his
mother.  I told him who was his father.  I said that I had my phaeton
ready, and that he might, for all I knew, be only in time to receive the
dying blessing of that parent whom he had never known.  Still the boy
would not go until he had my assurance that Harrison would take his
place.�

�Why did he not leave a message with Belcher?�

�My head was in a whirl, Sir Charles.  To find a father and a mother, a
new name and a new rank in a few minutes might turn a stronger brain than
ever mine was.  My mother begged me to come with her, and I went.  The
phaeton was waiting, but we had scarcely started when some fellow seized
the horses� heads, and a couple of ruffians attacked us.  One of them I
beat over the head with the butt of the whip, so that he dropped the
cudgel with which he was about to strike me; then lashing the horse, I
shook off the others and got safely away.  I cannot imagine who they were
or why they should molest us.�

�Perhaps Sir Lothian Hume could tell you,� said my uncle.

Our enemy said nothing; but his little grey eyes slid round with a most
murderous glance in our direction.

�After I had come here and seen my father I went down��

My uncle stopped him with a cry of astonishment.

�What did you say, young man?  You came here and you saw your father�here
at Cliffe Royal?�

�Yes, sir.�

My uncle had turned very pale.

�In God�s name, then, tell us who your father is!�

Jim made no answer save to point over our shoulders, and glancing round,
we became aware that two people had entered the room through the door
which led to the bedroom stair.  The one I recognized in an instant.
That impassive, mask-like face and demure manner could only belong to
Ambrose, the former valet of my uncle.  The other was a very different
and even more singular figure.  He was a tall man, clad in a dark
dressing-gown, and leaning heavily upon a stick.  His long, bloodless
countenance was so thin and so white that it gave the strangest illusion
of transparency.  Only within the folds of a shroud have I ever seen so
wan a face.  The brindled hair and the rounded back gave the impression
of advanced age, and it was only the dark brows and the bright alert eyes
glancing out from beneath them which made me doubt whether it was really
an old man who stood before us.

There was an instant of silence, broken by a deep oath from Sir Lothian
Hume�

�Lord Avon, by God!� he cried.

�Very much at your service, gentlemen,� answered the strange figure in
the dressing-gown.




CHAPTER XX.
LORD AVON.


MY uncle was an impassive man by nature and had become more so by the
tradition of the society in which he lived.  He could have turned a card
upon which his fortune depended without the twitch of a muscle, and I had
seen him myself driving to imminent death on the Godstone Road with as
calm a face as if he were out for his daily airing in the Mall.  But now
the shock which had come upon him was so great that he could only stand
with white cheeks and staring, incredulous eyes.  Twice I saw him open
his lips, and twice he put his hand up to his throat, as though a barrier
had risen betwixt himself and his utterance.  Finally, he took a sudden
little run forward with both his hands thrown out in greeting.

�Ned!� he cried.

But the strange man who stood before him folded his arms over his breast.

�No Charles,� said he.

My uncle stopped and looked at him in amazement.

�Surely, Ned, you have a greeting for me after all these years?�

�You believed me to have done this deed, Charles.  I read it in your eyes
and in your manner on that terrible morning.  You never asked me for an
explanation.  You never considered how impossible such a crime must be
for a man of my character.  At the first breath of suspicion you, my
intimate friend, the man who knew me best, set me down as a thief and a
murderer.�

�No, no, Ned.�

�You did, Charles; I read it in your eyes.  And so it was that when I
wished to leave that which was most precious to me in safe hands I had to
pass you over and to place him in the charge of the one man who from the
first never doubted my innocence.  Better a thousand times that my son
should be brought up in a humble station and in ignorance of his
unfortunate father, than that he should learn to share the doubts and
suspicions of his equals.�

�Then he is really your son!� cried my uncle, staring at Jim in
amazement.

For answer the man stretched out his long withered arm, and placed a
gaunt hand upon the shoulder of the actress, whilst she looked up at him
with love in her eyes.

�I married, Charles, and I kept it secret from my friends, for I had
chosen my wife outside our own circles.  You know the foolish pride which
has always been the strongest part of my nature.  I could not bear to
avow that which I had done.  It was this neglect upon my part which led
to an estrangement between us, and drove her into habits for which it is
I who am to blame and not she.  Yet on account of these same habits I
took the child from her and gave her an allowance on condition that she
did not interfere with it.  I had feared that the boy might receive evil
from her, and had never dreamed in my blindness that she might get good
from him.  But I have learned in my miserable life, Charles, that there
is a power which fashions things for us, though we may strive to thwart
it, and that we are in truth driven by an unseen current towards a
certain goal, however much we may deceive ourselves into thinking that it
is our own sails and oars which are speeding us upon our way.�

My eyes had been upon the face of my uncle as he listened, but now as I
turned them from him they fell once more upon the thin, wolfish face of
Sir Lothian Hume.  He stood near the window, his grey silhouette thrown
up against the square of dusty glass; and I have never seen such a play
of evil passions, of anger, of jealousy, of disappointed greed upon a
human face before.

�Am I to understand,� said he, in a loud, harsh voice, �that this young
man claims to be the heir of the peerage of Avon?�

�He is my lawful son.�

�I knew you fairly well, sir, in our youth; but you will allow me to
observe that neither I nor any friend of yours ever heard of a wife or a
son.  I defy Sir Charles Tregellis to say that he ever dreamed that there
was any heir except myself.�

�I have already explained, Sir Lothian, why I kept my marriage secret.�

�You have explained, sir; but it is for others in another place to say if
that explanation is satisfactory.�

Two blazing dark eyes flashed out of the pale haggard face with as
strange and sudden an effect as if a stream of light were to beat through
the windows of a shattered and ruined house.

�You dare to doubt my word?�

�I demand a proof.�

�My word is proof to those who know me.�

�Excuse me, Lord Avon; but I know you, and I see no reason why I should
accept your statement.�

It was a brutal speech, and brutally delivered.  Lord Avon staggered
forward, and it was only his son on one side and his wife on the other
who kept his quivering hands from the throat of his insulter.  Sir
Lothian recoiled from the pale fierce face with the black brows, but he
still glared angrily about the room.

�A very pretty conspiracy this,� he cried, �with a criminal, an actress,
and a prize-fighter all playing their parts.  Sir Charles Tregellis, you
shall hear from me again!  And you also, my lord!�  He turned upon his
heel and strode from the room.

�He has gone to denounce me,� said Lord Avon, a spasm of wounded pride
distorting his features.

�Shall I bring him back?� cried Boy Jim.

�No, no, let him go.  It is as well, for I have already made up my mind
that my duty to you, my son, outweighs that which I owe, and have at such
bitter cost fulfilled, to my brother and my family.�

�You did me an injustice, Ned,� said my uncle, �if you thought that I had
forgotten you, or that I had judged you unkindly.  If ever I have thought
that you had done this deed�and how could I doubt the evidence of my own
eyes�I have always believed that it was at a time when your mind was
unhinged, and when you knew no more of what you were about than the man
who is walking in his sleep.�

�What do you mean when you talk about the evidence of your own eyes?�
asked Lord Avon, looking hard at my uncle.

�I saw you, Ned, upon that accursed night.�

�Saw me?  Where?�

�In the passage.�

�And doing what?�

�You were coming from your brother�s room.  I had heard his voice raised
in anger and pain only an instant before.  You carried in your hand a bag
full of money, and your face betrayed the utmost agitation.  If you can
but explain to me, Ned, how you came to be there, you will take from my
heart a weight which has pressed upon it for all these years.�

No one now would have recognized in my uncle the man who was the leader
of all the fops of London.  In the presence of this old friend and of the
tragedy which girt him round, the veil of triviality and affectation had
been rent, and I felt all my gratitude towards him deepening for the
first time into affection whilst I watched his pale, anxious face, and
the eager hope which shone in his eyes as he awaited his friend�s
explanation.  Lord Avon sank his face in his hands, and for a few moments
there was silence in the dim grey room.

�I do not wonder now that you were shaken,� said he at last.  �My God,
what a net was cast round me!  Had this vile charge been brought against
me, you, my dearest friend, would have been compelled to tear away the
last doubt as to my guilt.  And yet, in spite of what you have seen,
Charles, I am as innocent in the matter as you are.�

�I thank God that I hear you say so.�

�But you are not satisfied, Charles.  I can read it on your face.  You
wish to know why an innocent man should conceal himself for all these
years.�

�Your word is enough for me, Ned; but the world will wish this other
question answered also.�

�It was to save the family honour, Charles.  You know how dear it was to
me.  I could not clear myself without proving my brother to have been
guilty of the foulest crime which a gentleman could commit.  For eighteen
years I have screened him at the expense of everything which a man could
sacrifice.  I have lived a living death which has left me an old and
shattered man when I am but in my fortieth year.  But now when I am faced
with the alternative of telling the facts about my brother, or of
wronging my son, I can only act in one fashion, and the more so since I
have reason to hope that a way may be found by which what I am now about
to disclose to you need never come to the public ear.�

He rose from his chair, and leaning heavily upon his two supporters, he
tottered across the room to the dust-covered sideboard.  There, in the
centre of it, was lying that ill-boding pile of time-stained, mildewed
cards, just as Boy Jim and I had seen them years before.  Lord Avon
turned them over with trembling fingers, and then picking up half a
dozen, he brought them to my uncle.

�Place your finger and thumb upon the left-hand bottom corner of this
card, Charles,� said he.  �Pass them lightly backwards and forwards, and
tell me what you feel.�

�It has been pricked with a pin.�

�Precisely.  What is the card?�

My uncle turned it over.

�It is the king of clubs.�

�Try the bottom corner of this one.�

�It is quite smooth.�

�And the card is?�

�The three of spades.�

�And this one?�

�It has been pricked.  It is the ace of hearts.�  Lord Avon hurled them
down upon the floor.

�There you have the whole accursed story!� he cried.  �Need I go further
where every word is an agony?�

�I see something, but not all.  You must continue, Ned.�

The frail figure stiffened itself, as though he were visibly bracing
himself for an effort.

�I will tell it you, then, once and for ever.  Never again, I trust, will
it be necessary for me to open my lips about the miserable business.  You
remember our game.  You remember how we lost.  You remember how you all
retired, and left me sitting in this very room, and at that very table.
Far from being tired, I was exceedingly wakeful, and I remained here for
an hour or more thinking over the incidents of the game and the changes
which it promised to bring about in my fortunes.  I had, as you will
recollect, lost heavily, and my only consolation was that my own brother
had won.  I knew that, owing to his reckless mode of life, he was firmly
in the clutches of the Jews, and I hoped that that which had shaken my
position might have the effect of restoring his.  As I sat there,
fingering the cards in an abstracted way, some chance led me to observe
the small needle-pricks which you have just felt.  I went over the packs,
and found, to my unspeakable horror, that any one who was in the secret
could hold them in dealing in such a way as to be able to count the exact
number of high cards which fell to each of his opponents.  And then, with
such a flush of shame and disgust as I had never known, I remembered how
my attention had been drawn to my brother�s mode of dealing, its
slowness, and the way in which he held each card by the lower corner.

�I did not condemn him precipitately.  I sat for a long time calling to
mind every incident which could tell one way or the other.  Alas! it all
went to confirm me in my first horrible suspicion, and to turn it into a
certainty.  My brother had ordered the packs from Ledbury�s, in Bond
Street.  They had been for some hours in his chambers.  He had played
throughout with a decision which had surprised us at the time.  Above
all, I could not conceal from myself that his past life was not such as
to make even so abominable a crime as this impossible to him.  Tingling
with anger and shame, I went straight up that stair, the cards in my
hand, and I taxed him with this lowest and meanest of all the crimes to
which a villain could descend.

�He had not retired to rest, and his ill-gotten gains were spread out
upon the dressing-table.  I hardly know what I said to him, but the facts
were so deadly that he did not attempt to deny his guilt.  You will
remember, as the only mitigation of his crime, that he was not yet one
and twenty years of age.  My words overwhelmed him.  He went on his knees
to me, imploring me to spare him.  I told him that out of consideration
for our family I should make no public exposure of him, but that he must
never again in his life lay his hand upon a card, and that the money
which he had won must be returned next morning with an explanation.  It
would be social ruin, he protested.  I answered that he must take the
consequence of his own deed.  Then and there I burned the papers which he
had won from me, and I replaced in a canvas bag which lay upon the table
all the gold pieces.  I would have left the room without another word,
but he clung to me, and tore the ruffle from my wrist in his attempt to
hold me back, and to prevail upon me to promise to say nothing to you or
Sir Lothian Hume.  It was his despairing cry, when he found that I was
proof against all his entreaties, which reached your ears, Charles, and
caused you to open your chamber door and to see me as I returned to my
room.�

My uncle drew a long sigh of relief.

�Nothing could be clearer!� he murmured.

�In the morning I came, as you remember, to your room, and I returned
your money.  I did the same to Sir Lothian Hume.  I said nothing of my
reasons for doing so, for I found that I could not bring myself to
confess our disgrace to you.  Then came the horrible discovery which has
darkened my life, and which was as great a mystery to me as it has been
to you.  I saw that I was suspected, and I saw, also, that even if I were
to clear myself, it could only be done by a public confession of the
infamy of my brother.  I shrank from it, Charles.  Any personal suffering
seemed to me to be better than to bring public shame upon a family which
has held an untarnished record through so many centuries.  I fled from my
trial, therefore, and disappeared from the world.

�But, first of all, it was necessary that I should make arrangements for
the wife and the son, of whose existence you and my other friends were
ignorant.  It is with shame, Mary, that I confess it, and I acknowledge
to you that the blame of all the consequences rests with me rather than
with you.  At the time there were reasons, now happily long gone past,
which made me determine that the son was better apart from the mother,
whose absence at that age he would not miss.  I would have taken you into
my confidence, Charles, had it not been that your suspicions had wounded
me deeply�for I did not at that time understand how strong the reasons
were which had prejudiced you against me.

�On the evening after the tragedy I fled to London, and arranged that my
wife should have a fitting allowance on condition that she did not
interfere with the child.  I had, as you remember, had much to do with
Harrison, the prize-fighter, and I had often had occasion to admire his
simple and honest nature.  I took my boy to him now, and I found him, as
I expected, incredulous as to my guilt, and ready to assist me in any
way.  At his wife�s entreaty he had just retired from the ring, and was
uncertain how he should employ himself.  I was able to fit him up as a
smith, on condition that he should ply his trade at the village of
Friar�s Oak.  My agreement was that James was to be brought up as their
nephew, and that he should know nothing of his unhappy parents.

�You will ask me why I selected Friar�s Oak.  It was because I had
already chosen my place of concealment; and if I could not see my boy, it
was, at least, some consolation to know that he was near me.  You are
aware that this mansion is one of the oldest in England; but you are not
aware that it has been built with a very special eye to concealment, that
there are no less than two habitable secret chambers, and that the outer
or thicker walls are tunnelled into passages.  The existence of these
rooms has always been a family secret, though it was one which I valued
so little that it was only the chance of my seldom using the house which
had prevented me from pointing them out to some friend.  Now I found that
a secure retreat was provided for me in my extremity.  I stole down to my
own mansion, entered it at night, and, leaving all that was dear to me
behind, I crept like a rat behind the wainscot, to live out the remainder
of my weary life in solitude and misery.  In this worn face, Charles, and
in this grizzled hair, you may read the diary of my most miserable
existence.

�Once a week Harrison used to bring me up provisions, passing them
through the pantry window, which I left open for the purpose.  Sometimes
I would steal out at night and walk under the stars once more, with the
cool breeze upon my forehead; but this I had at last to stop, for I was
seen by the rustics, and rumours of a spirit at Cliffe Royal began to get
about.  One night two ghost-hunters��

�It was I, father,� cried Boy Jim; �I and my friend, Rodney Stone.�

�I know it was.  Harrison told me so the same night.  I was proud, James,
to see that you had the spirit of the Barringtons, and that I had an heir
whose gallantry might redeem the family blot which I have striven so hard
to cover over.  Then came the day when your mother�s kindness�her
mistaken kindness�gave you the means of escaping to London.�

�Ah, Edward,� cried his wife, �if you had seen our boy, like a caged
eagle, beating against the bars, you would have helped to give him even
so short a flight as this.�

�I do not blame you, Mary.  It is possible that I should have done so.
He went to London, and he tried to open a career for himself by his own
strength and courage.  How many of our ancestors have done the same, save
only that a sword-hilt lay in their closed hands; but of them all I do
not know that any have carried themselves more gallantly!�

�That I dare swear,� said my uncle, heartily.

�And then, when Harrison at last returned, I learned that my son was
actually matched to fight in a public prize-battle.  That would not do,
Charles!  It was one thing to fight as you and I have fought in our
youth, and it was another to compete for a purse of gold.�

�My dear friend, I would not for the world��

�Of course you would not, Charles.  You chose the best man, and how could
you do otherwise?  But it would not do!  I determined that the time had
come when I should reveal myself to my son, the more so as there were
many signs that my most unnatural existence had seriously weakened my
health.  Chance, or shall I not rather say Providence, had at last made
clear all that had been dark, and given me the means of establishing my
innocence.  My wife went yesterday to bring my boy at last to the side of
his unfortunate father.�

There was silence for some time, and then it was my uncle�s voice which
broke it.

�You�ve been the most ill-used man in the world, Ned,� said he.  �Please
God we shall have many years yet in which to make up to you for it.  But,
after all, it seems to me that we are as far as ever from learning how
your unfortunate brother met his death.�

�For eighteen years it was as much a mystery to me as to you, Charles.
But now at last the guilt is manifest.  Stand forward, Ambrose, and tell
your story as frankly and as fully as you have told it to me.�




CHAPTER XXI.
THE VALET�S STORY.


THE valet had shrunk into the dark corner of the room, and had remained
so motionless that we had forgotten his presence until, upon this appeal
from his former master, he took a step forward into the light, turning
his sallow face in our direction.  His usually impassive features were in
a state of painful agitation, and he spoke slowly and with hesitation, as
though his trembling lips could hardly frame the words.  And yet, so
strong is habit, that, even in this extremity of emotion he assumed the
deferential air of the high-class valet, and his sentences formed
themselves in the sonorous fashion which had struck my attention upon
that first day when the curricle of my uncle had stopped outside my
father�s door.

�My Lady Avon and gentlemen,� said he, �if I have sinned in this matter,
and I freely confess that I have done so, I only know one way in which I
can atone for it, and that is by making the full and complete confession
which my noble master, Lord Avon, has demanded.  I assure you, then, that
what I am about to tell you, surprising as it may seem, is the absolute
and undeniable truth concerning the mysterious death of Captain
Barrington.

�It may seem impossible to you that one in my humble walk of life should
bear a deadly and implacable hatred against a man in the position of
Captain Barrington.  You think that the gulf between is too wide.  I can
tell you, gentlemen, that the gulf which can be bridged by unlawful love
can be spanned also by an unlawful hatred, and that upon the day when
this young man stole from me all that made my life worth living, I vowed
to Heaven that I should take from him that foul life of his, though the
deed would cover but the tiniest fraction of the debt which he owed me.
I see that you look askance at me, Sir Charles Tregellis, but you should
pray to God, sir, that you may never have the chance of finding out what
you would yourself be capable of in the same position.�

It was a wonder to all of us to see this man�s fiery nature breaking
suddenly through the artificial constraints with which he held it in
check.  His short dark hair seemed to bristle upwards, his eyes glowed
with the intensity of his passion, and his face expressed a malignity of
hatred which neither the death of his enemy nor the lapse of years could
mitigate.  The demure servant was gone, and there stood in his place a
deep and dangerous man, one who might be an ardent lover or a most
vindictive foe.

�We were about to be married, she and I, when some black chance threw him
across our path.  I do not know by what base deceptions he lured her away
from me.  I have heard that she was only one of many, and that he was an
adept at the art.  It was done before ever I knew the danger, and she was
left with her broken heart and her ruined life to return to that home
into which she had brought disgrace and misery.  I only saw her once.
She told me that her seducer had burst out a-laughing when she had
reproached him for his perfidy, and I swore to her that his heart�s blood
should pay me for that laugh.

�I was a valet at the time, but I was not yet in the service of Lord
Avon.  I applied for and gained that position with the one idea that it
might give me an opportunity of settling my accounts with his younger
brother.  And yet my chance was a terribly long time coming, for many
months had passed before the visit to Cliffe Royal gave me the
opportunity which I longed for by day and dreamed of by night.  When it
did come, however, it came in a fashion which was more favourable to my
plans than anything that I had ever ventured to hope for.

�Lord Avon was of opinion that no one but himself knew of the secret
passages in Cliffe Royal.  In this he was mistaken.  I knew of them�or,
at least, I knew enough of them to serve my purpose.  I need not tell you
how, one day, when preparing the chambers for the guests, an accidental
pressure upon part of the fittings caused a panel to gape in the
woodwork, and showed me a narrow opening in the wall.  Making my way down
this, I found that another panel led into a larger bedroom beyond.  That
was all I knew, but it was all that was needed for my purpose.  The
disposal of the rooms had been left in my hands, and I arranged that
Captain Barrington should sleep in the larger and I in the smaller.  I
could come upon him when I wished, and no one would be the wiser.

�And then he arrived.  How can I describe to you the fever of impatience
in which I lived until the moment should come for which I had waited and
planned.  For a night and a day they gambled, and for a night and a day I
counted the minutes which brought me nearer to my man.  They might ring
for fresh wine at what hour they liked, they always found me waiting and
ready, so that this young captain hiccoughed out that I was the model of
all valets.  My master advised me to go to bed.  He had noticed my
flushed cheek and my bright eyes, and he set me down as being in a fever.
So I was, but it was a fever which only one medicine could assuage.

�Then at last, very early in the morning, I heard them push back their
chairs, and I knew that their game had at last come to an end.  When I
entered the room to receive my orders, I found that Captain Barrington
had already stumbled off to bed.  The others had also retired, and my
master was sitting alone at the table, with his empty bottle and the
scattered cards in front of him.  He ordered me angrily to my room, and
this time I obeyed him.

�My first care was to provide myself with a weapon.  I knew that if I
were face to face with him I could tear his throat out, but I must so
arrange that the fashion of his death should be a noiseless one.  There
was a hunting trophy in the hall, and from it I took a straight heavy
knife which I sharpened upon my boot.  Then I stole to my room, and sat
waiting upon the side of my bed.  I had made up my mind what I should do.
There would be little satisfaction in killing him if he was not to know
whose hand had struck the blow, or which of his sins it came to avenge.
Could I but bind him and gag him in his drunken sleep, then a prick or
two of my dagger would arouse him to listen to what I had to say to him.
I pictured the look in his eyes as the haze of sleep cleared slowly away
from them, the look of anger turning suddenly to stark horror as he
understood who I was and what I had come for.  It would be the supreme
moment of my life.

�I waited as it seemed to me for at least an hour; but I had no watch,
and my impatience was such that I dare say it really was little more than
a quarter of that time.  Then I rose, removed my shoes, took my knife,
and having opened the panel, slipped silently through.  It was not more
than thirty feet that I had to go, but I went inch by inch, for the old
rotten boards snapped like breaking twigs if a sudden weight was placed
upon them.  It was, of course, pitch dark, and very, very slowly I felt
my way along.  At last I saw a yellow seam of light glimmering in front
of me, and I knew that it came from the other panel.  I was too soon,
then, since he had not extinguished his candles.  I had waited many
months, and I could afford to wait another hour, for I did not wish to do
anything precipitately or in a hurry.

�It was very necessary to move silently now, since I was within a few
feet of my man, with only the thin wooden partition between.  Age had
warped and cracked the boards, so that when I had at last very stealthily
crept my way as far as the sliding-panel, I found that I could, without
any difficulty, see into the room.  Captain Barrington was standing by
the dressing-table with his coat and vest off.  A large pile of
sovereigns, and several slips of paper were lying before him, and he was
counting over his gambling gains.  His face was flushed, and he was heavy
from want of sleep and from wine.  It rejoiced me to see it, for it meant
that his slumber would be deep, and that all would be made easy for me.

�I was still watching him, when of a sudden I saw him start, and a
terrible expression come upon his face.  For an instant my heart stood
still, for I feared that he had in some way divined my presence.  And
then I heard the voice of my master within.  I could not see the door by
which he had entered, nor could I see him where he stood, but I heard all
that he had to say.  As I watched the captain�s face flush fiery-red, and
then turn to a livid white as he listened to those bitter words which
told him of his infamy, my revenge was sweeter�far sweeter�than my most
pleasant dreams had ever pictured it.  I saw my master approach the
dressing-table, hold the papers in the flame of the candle, throw their
charred ashes into the grate, and sweep the golden pieces into a small
brown canvas bag.  Then, as he turned to leave the room, the captain
seized him by the wrist, imploring him, by the memory of their mother, to
have mercy upon him; and I loved my master as I saw him drag his sleeve
from the grasp of the clutching fingers, and leave the stricken wretch
grovelling upon the floor.

�And now I was left with a difficult point to settle, for it was hard for
me to say whether it was better that I should do that which I had come
for, or whether, by holding this man�s guilty secret, I might not have in
my hand a keener and more deadly weapon than my master�s hunting-knife.
I was sure that Lord Avon could not and would not expose him.  I knew
your sense of family pride too well, my lord, and I was certain that his
secret was safe in your hands.  But I both could and would; and then,
when his life had been blasted, and he had been hounded from his regiment
and from his clubs, it would be time, perhaps, for me to deal in some
other way with him.�

�Ambrose, you are a black villain,� said my uncle.

�We all have our own feelings, Sir Charles; and you will permit me to say
that a serving-man may resent an injury as much as a gentleman, though
the redress of the duel is denied to him.  But I am telling you frankly,
at Lord Avon�s request, all that I thought and did upon that night, and I
shall continue to do so, even if I am not fortunate enough to win your
approval.

�When Lord Avon had left him, the captain remained for some time in a
kneeling attitude, with his face sunk upon a chair.  Then he rose, and
paced slowly up and down the room, his chin sunk upon his breast.  Every
now and then he would pluck at his hair, or shake his clenched hands in
the air; and I saw the moisture glisten upon his brow.  For a time I lost
sight of him, and I heard him opening drawer after drawer, as though he
were in search of something.  Then he stood over by his dressing-table
again, with his back turned to me.  His head was thrown a little back,
and he had both hands up to the collar of his shirt, as though he were
striving to undo it.  And then there was a gush as if a ewer had been
upset, and down he sank upon the ground, with his head in the corner,
twisted round at so strange an angle to his shoulders that one glimpse of
it told me that my man was slipping swiftly from the clutch in which I
had fancied that I held him.  I slid my panel, and was in the room in an
instant.  His eyelids still quivered, and it seemed to me, as my gaze met
his glazing eyes, that I could read both recognition and surprise in
them.  I laid my knife upon the floor, and I stretched myself out beside
him, that I might whisper in his ear one or two little things of which I
wished to remind him; but even as I did so, he gave a gasp and was gone.

�It is singular that I, who had never feared him in life, should be
frightened at him now, and yet when I looked at him, and saw that all was
motionless save the creeping stain upon the carpet, I was seized with a
sudden foolish spasm of terror, and, catching up my knife, I fled swiftly
and silently back to my own room, closing the panels behind me.  It was
only when I had reached it that I found that in my mad haste I had
carried away, not the hunting-knife which I had taken with me, but the
bloody razor which had dropped from the dead man�s hand.  This I
concealed where no one has ever discovered it; but my fears would not
allow me to go back for the other, as I might perhaps have done, had I
foreseen how terribly its presence might tell against my master.  And
that, Lady Avon and gentlemen, is an exact and honest account of how
Captain Barrington came by his end.�

�And how was it,� asked my uncle, angrily, �that you have allowed an
innocent man to be persecuted all these years, when a word from you might
have saved him?�

�Because I had every reason to believe, Sir Charles, that that would be
most unwelcome to Lord Avon.  How could I tell all this without revealing
the family scandal which he was so anxious to conceal?  I confess that at
the beginning I did not tell him what I had seen, and my excuse must be
that he disappeared before I had time to determine what I should do.  For
many a year, however�ever since I have been in your service, Sir
Charles�my conscience tormented me, and I swore that if ever I should
find my old master, I should reveal everything to him.  The chance of my
overhearing a story told by young Mr. Stone here, which showed me that
some one was using the secret chambers of Cliffe Royal, convinced me that
Lord Avon was in hiding there, and I lost no time in seeking him out and
offering to do him all the justice in my power.�

�What he says is true,� said his master; �but it would have been strange
indeed if I had hesitated to sacrifice a frail life and failing health in
a cause for which I freely surrendered all that youth had to offer.  But
new considerations have at last compelled me to alter my resolution.  My
son, through ignorance of his true position, was drifting into a course
of life which accorded with his strength and spirit, but not with the
traditions of his house.  Again, I reflected that many of those who knew
my brother had passed away, that all the facts need not come out, and
that my death whilst under the suspicion of such a crime would cast a
deeper stain upon our name than the sin which he had so terribly
expiated.  For these reasons��

The tramp of several heavy footsteps reverberating through the old house
broke in suddenly upon Lord Avon�s words.  His wan face turned even a
shade greyer as he heard it, and he looked piteously to his wife and son.

�They will arrest me!� he cried.  �I must submit to the degradation of an
arrest.�

�This way, Sir James; this way,� said the harsh tones of Sir Lothian Hume
from without.

�I do not need to be shown the way in a house where I have drunk many a
bottle of good claret,� cried a deep voice in reply; and there in the
doorway stood the broad figure of Squire Ovington in his buckskins and
top-boots, a riding-crop in his hand.  Sir Lothian Hume was at his elbow,
and I saw the faces of two country constables peeping over his shoulders.

�Lord Avon,� said the squire, �as a magistrate of the county of Sussex,
it is my duty to tell you that a warrant is held against you for the
wilful murder of your brother, Captain Barrington, in the year 1786.�

�I am ready to answer the charge.�

�This I tell you as a magistrate.  But as a man, and the Squire of
Rougham Grange, I�m right glad to see you, Ned, and here�s my hand on it,
and never will I believe that a good Tory like yourself, and a man who
could show his horse�s tail to any field in the whole Down county, would
ever be capable of so vile an act.�

�You do me justice, James,� said Lord Avon, clasping the broad, brown
hand which the country squire had held out to him.  �I am as innocent as
you are; and I can prove it.�

�Damned glad I am to hear it, Ned!  That is to say, Lord Avon, that any
defence which you may have to make will be decided upon by your peers and
by the laws of your country.�

�Until which time,� added Sir Lothian Hume, �a stout door and a good lock
will be the best guarantee that Lord Avon will be there when called for.�

The squire�s weather-stained face flushed to a deeper red as he turned
upon the Londoner.

�Are you the magistrate of a county, sir?�

�I have not the honour, Sir James.�

�Then how dare you advise a man who has sat on the bench for nigh twenty
years!  When I am in doubt, sir, the law provides me with a clerk with
whom I may confer, and I ask no other assistance.�

�You take too high a tone in this matter, Sir James.  I am not accustomed
to be taken to task so sharply.�

�Nor am I accustomed, sir, to be interfered with in my official duties.
I speak as a magistrate, Sir Lothian, but I am always ready to sustain my
opinions as a man.�

Sir Lothian bowed.

�You will allow me to observe, sir, that I have personal interests of the
highest importance involved in this matter, I have every reason to
believe that there is a conspiracy afoot which will affect my position as
heir to Lord Avon�s titles and estates.  I desire his safe custody in
order that this matter may be cleared up, and I call upon you, as a
magistrate, to execute your warrant.�

�Plague take it, Ned!� cried the squire, �I would that my clerk Johnson
were here, for I would deal as kindly by you as the law allows; and yet I
am, as you hear, called upon to secure your person.�

�Permit me to suggest, sir,� said my uncle, �that so long as he is under
the personal supervision of the magistrate, he may be said to be under
the care of the law, and that this condition will be fulfilled if he is
under the roof of Rougham Grange.�

�Nothing could be better,� cried the squire, heartily.  �You will stay
with me, Ned, until this matter blows over.  In other words, Lord Avon, I
make myself responsible, as the representative of the law, that you are
held in safe custody until your person may be required of me.�

�Yours is a true heart, James.�

�Tut, tut! it is the due process of the law.  I trust, Sir Lothian Hume,
that you find nothing to object to in it?�

Sir Lothian shrugged his shoulders, and looked blackly at the magistrate.
Then he turned to my uncle.

�There is a small matter still open between us,� said he.  �Would you
kindly give me the name of a friend?  Mr. Corcoran, who is outside in my
barouche, would act for me, and we might meet to-morrow morning.�

�With pleasure,� answered my uncle.  �I dare say your father would act
for me, nephew?  Your friend may call upon Lieutenant Stone, of Friar�s
Oak, and the sooner the better.�

And so this strange conference ended.  As for me, I had sprung to the
side of the old friend of my boyhood, and was trying to tell him my joy
at his good fortune, and listening to his assurance that nothing that
could ever befall him could weaken the love that he bore me.  My uncle
touched me on the shoulder, and we were about to leave, when Ambrose,
whose bronze mask had been drawn down once more over his fiery passions,
came demurely towards him.

�Beg your pardon, Sir Charles,� said he; �but it shocks me very much to
see your cravat.�

�You are right, Ambrose,� my uncle answered.  �Lorimer does his best, but
I have never been able to fill your place.�

�I should be proud to serve you, sir; but you must acknowledge that Lord
Avon has the prior claim.  If he will release me��

�You may go, Ambrose; you may go!� cried Lord Avon.  �You are an
excellent servant, but your presence has become painful to me.�

�Thank you, Ned,� said my uncle.  �But you must not leave me so suddenly
again, Ambrose.�

�Permit me to explain the reason, sir.  I had determined to give you
notice when we reached Brighton; but as we drove from the village that
day, I caught a glimpse of a lady passing in a phaeton between whom and
Lord Avon I was well aware there was a close intimacy, although I was not
certain that she was actually his wife.  Her presence there confirmed me
in my opinion that he was in hiding at Cliffe Royal, and I dropped from
your curricle and followed her at once, in order to lay the matter before
her, and explain how very necessary it was that Lord Avon should see me.�

�Well, I forgive you for your desertion, Ambrose,� said my uncle; �and,�
he added, �I should be vastly obliged to you if you would re-arrange my
tie.�




CHAPTER XXII.
THE END.


SIR JAMES OVINGTON�S carriage was waiting without, and in it the Avon
family, so tragically separated and so strangely re-united, were borne
away to the squire�s hospitable home.  When they had gone, my uncle
mounted his curricle, and drove Ambrose and myself to the village.

�We had best see your father at once, nephew,� said he.  �Sir Lothian and
his man started some time ago.  I should be sorry if there should be any
hitch in our meeting.�

For my part, I was thinking of our opponent�s deadly reputation as a
duellist, and I suppose that my features must have betrayed my feelings,
for my uncle began to laugh.

�Why, nephew,� said he, �you look as if you were walking behind my
coffin.  It is not my first affair, and I dare bet that it will not be my
last.  When I fight near town I usually fire a hundred or so in Manton�s
back shop, but I dare say I can find my way to his waistcoat.  But I
confess that I am somewhat _accabl�_, by all that has befallen us.  To
think of my dear old friend being not only alive, but innocent as well!
And that he should have such a strapping son and heir to carry on the
race of Avon!  This will be the last blow to Hume, for I know that the
Jews have given him rope on the score of his expectations.  And you,
Ambrose, that you should break out in such a way!�

Of all the amazing things which had happened, this seemed to have
impressed my uncle most, and he recurred to it again and again.  That a
man whom he had come to regard as a machine for tying cravats and brewing
chocolate should suddenly develop fiery human passions was indeed a
prodigy.  If his silver razor-heater had taken to evil ways he could not
have been more astounded.

We were still a hundred yards from the cottage when I saw the tall,
green-coated Mr. Corcoran striding down the garden path.  My father was
waiting for us at the door with an expression of subdued delight upon his
face.

�Happy to serve you in any way, Sir Charles,� said he.  �We�ve arranged
it for to-morrow at seven on Ditching Common.�

�I wish these things could be brought off a little later in the day,�
said my uncle.  �One has either to rise at a perfectly absurd hour, or
else to neglect one�s toilet.�

�They are stopping across the road at the Friar�s Oak inn, and if you
would wish it later��

�No, no; I shall make the effort.  Ambrose, you will bring up the
_batteris de toilette_ at five.�

�I don�t know whether you would care to use my barkers,� said my father.
�I�ve had �em in fourteen actions, and up to thirty yards you couldn�t
wish a better tool.�

�Thank you, I have my duelling pistols under the seat.  See that the
triggers are oiled, Ambrose, for I love a light pull.  Ah, sister Mary, I
have brought your boy back to you, none the worse, I hope, for the
dissipations of town.�

I need not tell you how my dear mother wept over me and fondled me, for
you who have mothers will know for yourselves, and you who have not will
never understand how warm and snug the home nest can be.  How I had
chafed and longed for the wonders of town, and yet, now that I had seen
more than my wildest dreams had ever deemed possible, my eyes had rested
upon nothing which was so sweet and so restful as our own little
sitting-room, with its terra-cotta-coloured walls, and those trifles
which are so insignificant in themselves, and yet so rich in memories�the
blow-fish from the Moluccas, the narwhal�s horn from the Arctic, and the
picture of the _Ca Ira_, with Lord Hotham in chase!  How cheery, too, to
see at one side of the shining grate my father with his pipe and his
merry red face, and on the other my mother with her fingers ever turning
and darting with her knitting-needles!  As I looked at them I marvelled
that I could ever have longed to leave them, or that I could bring myself
to leave them again.

But leave them I must, and that speedily, as I learned amidst the
boisterous congratulations of my father and the tears of my mother.  He
had himself been appointed to the _Cato_, 64, with post rank, whilst a
note had come from Lord Nelson at Portsmouth to say that a vacancy was
open for me if I should present myself at once.

�And your mother has your sea-chest all ready, my lad, and you can travel
down with me to-morrow; for if you are to be one of Nelson�s men, you
must show him that you are worthy of it.�

�All the Stones have been in the sea-service,� said my mother,
apologetically to my uncle, �and it is a great chance that he should
enter under Lord Nelson�s own patronage.  But we can never forget your
kindness, Charles, in showing our dear Rodney something of the world.�

�On the contrary, sister Mary,� said my uncle, graciously, �your son has
been an excellent companion to me�so much so that I fear that I am open
to the charge of having neglected my dear Fidelio.  I trust that I bring
him back somewhat more polished than I found him.  It would be folly to
call him _distingu�_, but he is at least unobjectionable.  Nature has
denied him the highest gifts, and I find him adverse to employing the
compensating advantages of art; but, at least, I have shown him something
of life, and I have taught him a few lessons in finesse and deportment
which may appear to be wasted upon him at present, but which, none the
less, may come back to him in his more mature years.  If his career in
town has been a disappointment to me, the reason lies mainly in the fact
that I am foolish enough to measure others by the standard which I have
myself set.  I am well disposed towards him, however, and I consider him
eminently adapted for the profession which he is about to adopt.�

He held out his sacred snuff-box to me as he spoke, as a solemn pledge of
his goodwill, and, as I look back at him, there is no moment at which I
see him more plainly than that with the old mischievous light dancing
once more in his large intolerant eyes, one thumb in the armpit of his
vest, and the little shining box held out upon his snow-white palm.  He
was a type and leader of a strange breed of men which has vanished away
from England�the full-blooded, virile buck, exquisite in his dress,
narrow in his thoughts, coarse in his amusements, and eccentric in his
habits.  They walk across the bright stage of English history with their
finicky step, their preposterous cravats, their high collars, their
dangling seals, and they vanish into those dark wings from which there is
no return.  The world has outgrown them, and there is no place now for
their strange fashions, their practical jokes, and carefully cultivated
eccentricities.  And yet behind this outer veiling of folly, with which
they so carefully draped themselves, they were often men of strong
character and robust personality.  The languid loungers of St. James�s
were also the yachtsmen of the Solent, the fine riders of the shires, and
the hardy fighters in many a wayside battle and many a morning frolic.
Wellington picked his best officers from amongst them.  They condescended
occasionally to poetry or oratory; and Byron, Charles James Fox,
Sheridan, and Castlereagh, preserved some reputation amongst them, in
spite of their publicity.  I cannot think how the historian of the future
can hope to understand them, when I, who knew one of them so well, and
bore his blood in my veins, could never quite tell how much of him was
real, and how much was due to the affectations which he had cultivated so
long that they had ceased to deserve the name.  Through the chinks of
that armour of folly I have sometimes thought that I had caught a glimpse
of a good and true man within, and it pleases me to hope that I was
right.

It was destined that the exciting incidents of that day were even now not
at an end.  I had retired early to rest, but it was impossible for me to
sleep, for my mind would turn to Boy Jim and to the extraordinary change
in his position and prospects.  I was still turning and tossing when I
heard the sound of flying hoofs coming down the London Road, and
immediately afterwards the grating of wheels as they pulled up in front
of the inn.  My window chanced to be open, for it was a fresh spring
night, and I heard the creak of the inn door, and a voice asking whether
Sir Lothian Hume was within.  At the name I sprang from my bed, and I was
in time to see three men, who had alighted from the carriage, file into
the lighted hall.  The two horses were left standing, with the glare of
the open door falling upon their brown shoulders and patient heads.

Ten minutes may have passed, and then I heard the clatter of many steps,
and a knot of men came clustering through the door.

�You need not employ violence,� said a harsh, clear voice.  �On whose
suit is it?�

�Several suits, sir.  They �eld over in the �opes that you�d pull off the
fight this mornin�.  Total amounts is twelve thousand pound.�

�Look here, my man, I have a very important appointment for seven o�clock
to-morrow.  I�ll give you fifty pounds if you will leave me until then.�

�Couldn�t do it, sir, really.  It�s more than our places as sheriff�s
officers is worth.�

In the yellow glare of the carriage-lamp I saw the baronet look up at our
windows, and if hatred could have killed, his eyes would have been as
deadly as his pistol.

�I can�t mount the carriage unless you free my hands,� said he.

��Old �ard, Bill, for �e looks vicious.  Let go o� one arm at a time!
Ah, would you then?�

�Corcoran!  Corcoran!� screamed a voice, and I saw a plunge, a struggle,
and one frantic figure breaking its way from the rest.  Then came a heavy
blow, and down he fell in the middle of the moonlit road, flapping and
jumping among the dust like a trout new landed.

�He�s napped it this time!  Get �im by the wrists, Jim!  Now, all
together!�

He was hoisted up like a bag of flour, and fell with a brutal thud into
the bottom of the carriage.  The three men sprang in after him, a whip
whistled in the darkness, and I had seen the last that I or any one else,
save some charitable visitor to a debtors� gaol, was ever again destined
to see of Sir Lothian Hume, the once fashionable Corinthian.

                                * * * * *

Lord Avon lived for two years longer�long enough, with the help of
Ambrose, to fully establish his innocence of the horrible crime, in the
shadow of which he had lived so long.  What he could not clear away,
however, was the effect of those years of morbid and unnatural life spent
in the hidden chambers of the old house; and it was only the devotion of
his wife and of his son which kept the thin and flickering flame of his
life alight.  She whom I had known as the play actress of Anstey Cross
became the dowager Lady Avon; whilst Boy Jim, as dear to me now as when
we harried birds� nests and tickled trout together, is now Lord Avon,
beloved by his tenantry, the finest sportsman and the most popular man
from the north of the Weald to the Channel.  He was married to the second
daughter of Sir James Ovington; and as I have seen three of his
grandchildren within the week, I fancy that if any of Sir Lothian�s
descendants have their eye upon the property, they are likely to be as
disappointed as their ancestor was before them.  The old house of Cliffe
Royal has been pulled down, owing to the terrible family associations
which hung round it, and a beautiful modern building sprang up in its
place.  The lodge which stood by the Brighton Road was so dainty with its
trellis-work and its rose bushes that I was not the only visitor who
declared that I had rather be the owner of it than of the great house
amongst the trees.  There for many years in a happy and peaceful old age
lived Jack Harrison and his wife, receiving back in the sunset of their
lives the loving care which they had themselves bestowed.  Never again
did Champion Harrison throw his leg over the ropes of a twenty-four-foot
ring; but the story of the great battle between the smith and the West
Countryman is still familiar to old ring-goers, and nothing pleased him
better than to re-fight it all, round by round, as he sat in the sunshine
under his rose-girt porch.  But if he heard the tap of his wife�s stick
approaching him, his talk would break off at once into the garden and its
prospects, for she was still haunted by the fear that he would some day
go back to the ring, and she never missed the old man for an hour without
being convinced that he had hobbled off to wrest the belt from the latest
upstart champion.  It was at his own very earnest request that they
inscribed �He fought the good fight� upon his tombstone, and though I
cannot doubt that he had Black Bank and Crab Wilson in his mind when he
asked it, yet none who knew him would grudge its spiritual meaning as a
summing up of his clean and manly life.

Sir Charles Tregellis continued for some years to show his scarlet and
gold at Newmarket, and his inimitable coats in St. James�s.  It was he
who invented buttons and loops at the ends of dress pantaloons, and who
broke fresh ground by his investigation of the comparative merits of
isinglass and of starch in the preparation of shirt-fronts.  There are
old fops still lurking in the corners of Arthur�s or of White�s who can
remember Tregellis�s dictum, that a cravat should be so stiffened that
three parts of the length could be raised by one corner, and the painful
schism which followed when Lord Alvanley and his school contended that a
half was sufficient.  Then came the supremacy of Brummell, and the open
breach upon the subject of velvet collars, in which the town followed the
lead of the younger man.  My uncle, who was not born to be second to any
one, retired instantly to St. Albans, and announced that he would make it
the centre of fashion and of society, instead of degenerate London.  It
chanced, however, that the mayor and corporation waited upon him with an
address of thanks for his good intentions towards the town, and that the
burgesses, having ordered new coats from London for the occasion, were
all arrayed in velvet collars, which so preyed upon my uncle�s spirits
that he took to his bed, and never showed his face in public again.  His
money, which had ruined what might have been a great life, was divided
amongst many bequests, an annuity to his valet, Ambrose, being amongst
them; but enough has come to his sister, my dear mother, to help to make
her old age as sunny and as pleasant as even I could wish.

                                * * * * *

And as for me�the poor string upon which these beads are strung�I dare
scarce say another word about myself, lest this, which I had meant to be
the last word of a chapter, should grow into the first words of a new
one.  Had I not taken up my pen to tell you a story of the land, I might,
perchance, have made a better one of the sea; but the one frame cannot
hold two opposite pictures.  The day may come when I shall write down all
that I remember of the greatest battle ever fought upon salt water, and
how my father�s gallant life was brought to an end as, with his paint
rubbing against a French eighty-gun ship on one side and a Spanish
seventy-four upon the other he stood eating an apple in the break of his
poop.  I saw the smoke banks on that October evening swirl slowly up over
the Atlantic swell, and rise, and rise, until they had shredded into
thinnest air, and lost themselves in the infinite blue of heaven.  And
with them rose the cloud which had hung over the country; and it also
thinned and thinned, until God�s own sun of peace and security was
shining once more upon us, never more, we hope, to be bedimmed.

THE WHITE COMPANY

CHAPTER I. HOW THE BLACK SHEEP CAME FORTH FROM THE FOLD.


The great bell of Beaulieu was ringing. Far away through the forest
might be heard its musical clangor and swell. Peat-cutters on Blackdown
and fishers upon the Exe heard the distant throbbing rising and falling
upon the sultry summer air. It was a common sound in those parts--as
common as the chatter of the jays and the booming of the bittern. Yet
the fishers and the peasants raised their heads and looked questions at
each other, for the angelus had already gone and vespers was still far
off. Why should the great bell of Beaulieu toll when the shadows were
neither short nor long?

All round the Abbey the monks were trooping in. Under the long
green-paved avenues of gnarled oaks and of lichened beeches the
white-robed brothers gathered to the sound. From the vine-yard and
the vine-press, from the bouvary or ox-farm, from the marl-pits and
salterns, even from the distant iron-works of Sowley and the outlying
grange of St. Leonard's, they had all turned their steps homewards. It
had been no sudden call. A swift messenger had the night before sped
round to the outlying dependencies of the Abbey, and had left the
summons for every monk to be back in the cloisters by the third hour
after noontide. So urgent a message had not been issued within the
memory of old lay-brother Athanasius, who had cleaned the Abbey knocker
since the year after the Battle of Bannockburn.

A stranger who knew nothing either of the Abbey or of its immense
resources might have gathered from the appearance of the brothers some
conception of the varied duties which they were called upon to perform,
and of the busy, wide-spread life which centred in the old monastery.
As they swept gravely in by twos and by threes, with bended heads and
muttering lips there were few who did not bear upon them some signs of
their daily toil. Here were two with wrists and sleeves all spotted
with the ruddy grape juice. There again was a bearded brother with
a broad-headed axe and a bundle of faggots upon his shoulders, while
beside him walked another with the shears under his arm and the white
wool still clinging to his whiter gown. A long, straggling troop bore
spades and mattocks while the two rearmost of all staggered along under
a huge basket o' fresh-caught carp, for the morrow was Friday, and there
were fifty platters to be filled and as many sturdy trenchermen behind
them. Of all the throng there was scarce one who was not labor-stained
and weary, for Abbot Berghersh was a hard man to himself and to others.

Meanwhile, in the broad and lofty chamber set apart for occasions of
import, the Abbot himself was pacing impatiently backwards and forwards,
with his long white nervous hands clasped in front of him. His thin,
thought-worn features and sunken, haggard cheeks bespoke one who had
indeed beaten down that inner foe whom every man must face, but had none
the less suffered sorely in the contest. In crushing his passions he had
well-nigh crushed himself. Yet, frail as was his person there gleamed
out ever and anon from under his drooping brows a flash of fierce
energy, which recalled to men's minds that he came of a fighting stock,
and that even now his twin-brother, Sir Bartholomew Berghersh, was one
of the most famous of those stern warriors who had planted the Cross of
St. George before the gates of Paris. With lips compressed and clouded
brow, he strode up and down the oaken floor, the very genius and
impersonation of asceticism, while the great bell still thundered and
clanged above his head. At last the uproar died away in three last,
measured throbs, and ere their echo had ceased the Abbot struck a small
gong which summoned a lay-brother to his presence.

�Have the brethren come?� he asked, in the Anglo-French dialect used in
religious houses.

�They are here,� the other answered, with his eyes cast down and his
hands crossed upon his chest.

�All?�

�Two and thirty of the seniors and fifteen of the novices, most holy
father. Brother Mark of the Spicarium is sore smitten with a fever and
could not come. He said that--�

�It boots not what he said. Fever or no, he should have come at my call.
His spirit must be chastened, as must that of many more in this Abbey.
You yourself, brother Francis, have twice raised your voice, so it hath
come to my ears, when the reader in the refectory hath been dealing with
the lives of God's most blessed saints. What hast thou to say?�

The lay-brother stood meek and silent, with his arms still crossed in
front of him.

�One thousand Aves and as many Credos, said standing with arms
outstretched before the shrine of the Virgin, may help thee to remember
that the Creator hath given us two ears and but one mouth, as a token
that there is twice the work for the one as for the other. Where is the
master of the novices?�

�He is without, most holy father.�

�Send him hither.�

The sandalled feet clattered over the wooden floor, and the iron-bound
door creaked upon its hinges. In a few moments it opened again to admit
a short square monk with a heavy, composed face and an authoritative
manner.

�You have sent for me, holy father?�

�Yes, brother Jerome, I wish that this matter be disposed of with as
little scandal as may be, and yet it is needful that the example should
be a public one.� The Abbot spoke in Latin now, as a language which was
more fitted by its age and solemnity to convey the thoughts of two high
dignitaries of the order.

�It would, perchance, be best that the novices be not admitted,�
 suggested the master. �This mention of a woman may turn their minds from
their pious meditations to worldly and evil thoughts.�

�Woman! woman!� groaned the Abbot. �Well has the holy Chrysostom termed
them _radix malorum_. From Eve downwards, what good hath come from any
of them? Who brings the plaint?�

�It is brother Ambrose.�

�A holy and devout young man.�

�A light and a pattern to every novice.�

�Let the matter be brought to an issue then according to our old-time
monastic habit. Bid the chancellor and the sub-chancellor lead in the
brothers according to age, together with brother John, the accused, and
brother Ambrose, the accuser.�

�And the novices?�

�Let them bide in the north alley of the cloisters. Stay! Bid the
sub-chancellor send out to them Thomas the lector to read unto them
from the 'Gesta beati Benedicti.' It may save them from foolish and
pernicious babbling.�

The Abbot was left to himself once more, and bent his thin gray face
over his illuminated breviary. So he remained while the senior monks
filed slowly and sedately into the chamber seating themselves upon the
long oaken benches which lined the wall on either side. At the further
end, in two high chairs as large as that of the Abbot, though hardly as
elaborately carved, sat the master of the novices and the chancellor,
the latter a broad and portly priest, with dark mirthful eyes and a
thick outgrowth of crisp black hair all round his tonsured head. Between
them stood a lean, white-faced brother who appeared to be ill at ease,
shifting his feet from side to side and tapping his chin nervously with
the long parchment roll which he held in his hand. The Abbot, from his
point of vantage, looked down on the two long lines of faces, placid and
sun-browned for the most part, with the large bovine eyes and unlined
features which told of their easy, unchanging existence. Then he turned
his eager fiery gaze upon the pale-faced monk who faced him.

�This plaint is thine, as I learn, brother Ambrose,� said he. �May the
holy Benedict, patron of our house, be present this day and aid us in
our findings! How many counts are there?�

�Three, most holy father,� the brother answered in a low and quavering
voice.

�Have you set them forth according to rule?�

�They are here set down, most holy father, upon a cantle of sheep-skin.�

�Let the sheep-skin be handed to the chancellor. Bring in brother John,
and let him hear the plaints which have been urged against him.�

At this order a lay-brother swung open the door, and two other
lay-brothers entered leading between them a young novice of the order.
He was a man of huge stature, dark-eyed and red-headed, with a peculiar
half-humorous, half-defiant expression upon his bold, well-marked
features. His cowl was thrown back upon his shoulders, and his gown,
unfastened at the top, disclosed a round, sinewy neck, ruddy and corded
like the bark of the fir. Thick, muscular arms, covered with a reddish
down, protruded from the wide sleeves of his habit, while his white
shirt, looped up upon one side, gave a glimpse of a huge knotty leg,
scarred and torn with the scratches of brambles. With a bow to the
Abbot, which had in it perhaps more pleasantry than reverence, the
novice strode across to the carved prie-dieu which had been set apart
for him, and stood silent and erect with his hand upon the gold bell
which was used in the private orisons of the Abbot's own household. His
dark eyes glanced rapidly over the assembly, and finally settled with a
grim and menacing twinkle upon the face of his accuser.

The chancellor rose, and having slowly unrolled the parchment-scroll,
proceeded to read it out in a thick and pompous voice, while a subdued
rustle and movement among the brothers bespoke the interest with which
they followed the proceedings.

�Charges brought upon the second Thursday after the Feast of the
Assumption, in the year of our Lord thirteen hundred and sixty-six,
against brother John, formerly known as Hordle John, or John of Hordle,
but now a novice in the holy monastic order of the Cistercians. Read
upon the same day at the Abbey of Beaulieu in the presence of the most
reverend Abbot Berghersh and of the assembled order.

�The charges against the said brother John are the following, namely, to
wit:

�First, that on the above-mentioned Feast of the Assumption, small beer
having been served to the novices in the proportion of one quart to
each four, the said brother John did drain the pot at one draught to
the detriment of brother Paul, brother Porphyry and brother Ambrose,
who could scarce eat their none-meat of salted stock-fish on account of
their exceeding dryness.�

At this solemn indictment the novice raised his hand and twitched his
lip, while even the placid senior brothers glanced across at each other
and coughed to cover their amusement. The Abbot alone sat gray and
immutable, with a drawn face and a brooding eye.

�Item, that having been told by the master of the novices that he should
restrict his food for two days to a single three-pound loaf of bran and
beans, for the greater honoring and glorifying of St. Monica, mother of
the holy Augustine, he was heard by brother Ambrose and others to say
that he wished twenty thousand devils would fly away with the said
Monica, mother of the holy Augustine, or any other saint who came
between a man and his meat. Item, that upon brother Ambrose reproving
him for this blasphemous wish, he did hold the said brother face
downwards over the piscatorium or fish-pond for a space during which
the said brother was able to repeat a pater and four aves for the better
fortifying of his soul against impending death.�

There was a buzz and murmur among the white-frocked brethren at this
grave charge; but the Abbot held up his long quivering hand. �What
then?� said he.

�Item, that between nones and vespers on the feast of James the Less the
said brother John was observed upon the Brockenhurst road, near the spot
which is known as Hatchett's Pond in converse with a person of the other
sex, being a maiden of the name of Mary Sowley, the daughter of the
King's verderer. Item, that after sundry japes and jokes the said
brother John did lift up the said Mary Sowley and did take, carry, and
convey her across a stream, to the infinite relish of the devil and the
exceeding detriment of his own soul, which scandalous and wilful falling
away was witnessed by three members of our order.�

A dead silence throughout the room, with a rolling of heads and
upturning of eyes, bespoke the pious horror of the community.

The Abbot drew his gray brows low over his fiercely questioning eyes.

�Who can vouch for this thing?� he asked.

�That can I,� answered the accuser. �So too can brother Porphyry, who
was with me, and brother Mark of the Spicarium, who hath been so much
stirred and inwardly troubled by the sight that he now lies in a fever
through it.�

�And the woman?� asked the Abbot. �Did she not break into lamentation
and woe that a brother should so demean himself?�

�Nay, she smiled sweetly upon him and thanked him. I can vouch it and so
can brother Porphyry.�

�Canst thou?� cried the Abbot, in a high, tempestuous tone. �Canst thou
so? Hast forgotten that the five-and-thirtieth rule of the order is that
in the presence of a woman the face should be ever averted and the eyes
cast down? Hast forgot it, I say? If your eyes were upon your sandals,
how came ye to see this smile of which ye prate? A week in your cells,
false brethren, a week of rye-bread and lentils, with double lauds and
double matins, may help ye to remembrance of the laws under which ye
live.�

At this sudden outflame of wrath the two witnesses sank their faces on
to their chests, and sat as men crushed. The Abbot turned his angry eyes
away from them and bent them upon the accused, who met his searching
gaze with a firm and composed face.

�What hast thou to say, brother John, upon these weighty things which
are urged against you?�

�Little enough, good father, little enough,� said the novice, speaking
English with a broad West Saxon drawl. The brothers, who were English
to a man, pricked up their ears at the sound of the homely and yet
unfamiliar speech; but the Abbot flushed red with anger, and struck his
hand upon the oaken arm of his chair.

�What talk is this?� he cried. �Is this a tongue to be used within the
walls of an old and well-famed monastery? But grace and learning have
ever gone hand in hand, and when one is lost it is needless to look for
the other.�

�I know not about that,� said brother John. �I know only that the words
come kindly to my mouth, for it was the speech of my fathers before me.
Under your favor, I shall either use it now or hold my peace.�

The Abbot patted his foot and nodded his head, as one who passes a point
but does not forget it.

�For the matter of the ale,� continued brother John, �I had come in hot
from the fields and had scarce got the taste of the thing before
mine eye lit upon the bottom of the pot. It may be, too, that I spoke
somewhat shortly concerning the bran and the beans, the same being poor
provender and unfitted for a man of my inches. It is true also that I
did lay my hands upon this jack-fool of a brother Ambrose, though, as
you can see, I did him little scathe. As regards the maid, too, it is
true that I did heft her over the stream, she having on her hosen and
shoon, whilst I had but my wooden sandals, which could take no hurt from
the water. I should have thought shame upon my manhood, as well as my
monkhood, if I had held back my hand from her.� He glanced around as
he spoke with the half-amused look which he had worn during the whole
proceedings.

�There is no need to go further,� said the Abbot. �He has confessed to
all. It only remains for me to portion out the punishment which is due
to his evil conduct.�

He rose, and the two long lines of brothers followed his example,
looking sideways with scared faces at the angry prelate.

�John of Hordle,� he thundered, �you have shown yourself during the two
months of your novitiate to be a recreant monk, and one who is unworthy
to wear the white garb which is the outer symbol of the spotless spirit.
That dress shall therefore be stripped from thee, and thou shalt be cast
into the outer world without benefit of clerkship, and without lot or
part in the graces and blessings of those who dwell under the care of
the Blessed Benedict. Thou shalt come back neither to Beaulieu nor to
any of the granges of Beaulieu, and thy name shall be struck off the
scrolls of the order.�

The sentence appeared a terrible one to the older monks, who had become
so used to the safe and regular life of the Abbey that they would have
been as helpless as children in the outer world. From their pious
oasis they looked dreamily out at the desert of life, a place full of
stormings and strivings--comfortless, restless, and overshadowed by
evil. The young novice, however, appeared to have other thoughts, for
his eyes sparkled and his smile broadened. It needed but that to add
fresh fuel to the fiery mood of the prelate.

�So much for thy spiritual punishment,� he cried. �But it is to thy
grosser feelings that we must turn in such natures as thine, and as
thou art no longer under the shield of holy church there is the less
difficulty. Ho there! lay-brothers--Francis, Naomi, Joseph--seize him
and bind his arms! Drag him forth, and let the foresters and the porters
scourge him from the precincts!�

As these three brothers advanced towards him to carry out the Abbot's
direction, the smile faded from the novice's face, and he glanced right
and left with his fierce brown eyes, like a bull at a baiting. Then,
with a sudden deep-chested shout, he tore up the heavy oaken prie-dieu
and poised it to strike, taking two steps backward the while, that none
might take him at a vantage.

�By the black rood of Waltham!� he roared, �if any knave among you lays
a finger-end upon the edge of my gown, I will crush his skull like a
filbert!� With his thick knotted arms, his thundering voice, and his
bristle of red hair, there was something so repellent in the man that
the three brothers flew back at the very glare of him; and the two rows
of white monks strained away from him like poplars in a tempest. The
Abbot only sprang forward with shining eyes; but the chancellor and the
master hung upon either arm and wrested him back out of danger's way.

�He is possessed of a devil!� they shouted. �Run, brother Ambrose,
brother Joachim! Call Hugh of the Mill, and Woodman Wat, and Raoul with
his arbalest and bolts. Tell them that we are in fear of our lives! Run,
run! for the love of the Virgin!�

But the novice was a strategist as well as a man of action. Springing
forward, he hurled his unwieldy weapon at brother Ambrose, and, as desk
and monk clattered on to the floor together, he sprang through the open
door and down the winding stair. Sleepy old brother Athanasius, at
the porter's cell, had a fleeting vision of twinkling feet and flying
skirts; but before he had time to rub his eyes the recreant had passed
the lodge, and was speeding as fast as his sandals could patter along
the Lyndhurst Road.



CHAPTER II. HOW ALLEYNE EDRICSON CAME OUT INTO THE WORLD.


Never had the peaceful atmosphere of the old Cistercian house been so
rudely ruffled. Never had there been insurrection so sudden, so short,
and so successful. Yet the Abbot Berghersh was a man of too firm a grain
to allow one bold outbreak to imperil the settled order of his great
household. In a few hot and bitter words, he compared their false
brother's exit to the expulsion of our first parents from the garden,
and more than hinted that unless a reformation occurred some others of
the community might find themselves in the same evil and perilous case.
Having thus pointed the moral and reduced his flock to a fitting state
of docility, he dismissed them once more to their labors and withdrew
himself to his own private chamber, there to seek spiritual aid in the
discharge of the duties of his high office.

The Abbot was still on his knees, when a gentle tapping at the door of
his cell broke in upon his orisons.

Rising in no very good humor at the interruption, he gave the word to
enter; but his look of impatience softened down into a pleasant and
paternal smile as his eyes fell upon his visitor.

He was a thin-faced, yellow-haired youth, rather above the middle size,
comely and well shapen, with straight, lithe figure and eager, boyish
features. His clear, pensive gray eyes, and quick, delicate expression,
spoke of a nature which had unfolded far from the boisterous joys and
sorrows of the world. Yet there was a set of the mouth and a prominence
of the chin which relieved him of any trace of effeminacy. Impulsive
he might be, enthusiastic, sensitive, with something sympathetic and
adaptive in his disposition; but an observer of nature's tokens would
have confidently pledged himself that there was native firmness and
strength underlying his gentle, monk-bred ways.

The youth was not clad in monastic garb, but in lay attire, though his
jerkin, cloak and hose were all of a sombre hue, as befitted one who
dwelt in sacred precincts. A broad leather strap hanging from his
shoulder supported a scrip or satchel such as travellers were wont to
carry. In one hand he grasped a thick staff pointed and shod with metal,
while in the other he held his coif or bonnet, which bore in its front a
broad pewter medal stamped with the image of Our Lady of Rocamadour.

�Art ready, then, fair son?� said the Abbot. �This is indeed a day of
comings and of goings. It is strange that in one twelve hours the Abbey
should have cast off its foulest weed and should now lose what we are
fain to look upon as our choicest blossom.�

�You speak too kindly, father,� the youth answered. �If I had my will I
should never go forth, but should end my days here in Beaulieu. It hath
been my home as far back as my mind can carry me, and it is a sore thing
for me to have to leave it.�

�Life brings many a cross,� said the Abbot gently. �Who is without them?
Your going forth is a grief to us as well as to yourself. But there
is no help. I had given my foreword and sacred promise to your father,
Edric the Franklin, that at the age of twenty you should be sent out
into the world to see for yourself how you liked the savor of it. Seat
thee upon the settle, Alleyne, for you may need rest ere long.�

The youth sat down as directed, but reluctantly and with diffidence.
The Abbot stood by the narrow window, and his long black shadow fell
slantwise across the rush-strewn floor.

�Twenty years ago,� he said, �your father, the Franklin of Minstead,
died, leaving to the Abbey three hides of rich land in the hundred of
Malwood, and leaving to us also his infant son on condition that we
should rear him until he came to man's estate. This he did partly
because your mother was dead, and partly because your elder brother,
now Socman of Minstead, had already given sign of that fierce and rude
nature which would make him no fit companion for you. It was his desire
and request, however, that you should not remain in the cloisters, but
should at a ripe age return into the world.�

�But, father,� interrupted the young man, �it is surely true that I am
already advanced several degrees in clerkship?�

�Yes, fair son, but not so far as to bar you from the garb you now wear
or the life which you must now lead. You have been porter?�

�Yes, father.�

�Exorcist?�

�Yes, father.�

�Reader?�

�Yes, father.�

�Acolyte?�

�Yes, father.�

�But have sworn no vow of constancy or chastity?�

�No, father.�

�Then you are free to follow a worldly life. But let me hear, ere you
start, what gifts you take away with you from Beaulieu? Some I already
know. There is the playing of the citole and the rebeck. Our choir will
be dumb without you. You carve too?�

The youth's pale face flushed with the pride of the skilled workman.
�Yes, holy father,� he answered. �Thanks to good brother Bartholomew, I
carve in wood and in ivory, and can do something also in silver and
in bronze. From brother Francis I have learned to paint on vellum, on
glass, and on metal, with a knowledge of those pigments and essences
which can preserve the color against damp or a biting air. Brother
Luke hath given me some skill in damask work, and in the enamelling of
shrines, tabernacles, diptychs and triptychs. For the rest, I know a
little of the making of covers, the cutting of precious stones, and the
fashioning of instruments.�

�A goodly list, truly,� cried the superior with a smile. �What clerk of
Cambrig or of Oxenford could say as much? But of thy reading--hast not
so much to show there, I fear?�

�No, father, it hath been slight enough. Yet, thanks to our good
chancellor, I am not wholly unlettered. I have read Ockham, Bradwardine,
and other of the schoolmen, together with the learned Duns Scotus and
the book of the holy Aquinas.�

�But of the things of this world, what have you gathered from your
reading? From this high window you may catch a glimpse over the wooden
point and the smoke of Bucklershard of the mouth of the Exe, and the
shining sea. Now, I pray you, Alleyne, if a man were to take a ship and
spread sail across yonder waters, where might he hope to arrive?�

The youth pondered, and drew a plan amongst the rushes with the point
of his staff. �Holy father,� said he, �he would come upon those parts
of France which are held by the King's Majesty. But if he trended to the
south he might reach Spain and the Barbary States. To his north would be
Flanders and the country of the Eastlanders and of the Muscovites.�

�True. And how if, after reaching the King's possessions, he still
journeyed on to the eastward?�

�He would then come upon that part of France which is still in dispute,
and he might hope to reach the famous city of Avignon, where dwells our
blessed father, the prop of Christendom.�

�And then?�

�Then he would pass through the land of the Almains and the great Roman
Empire, and so to the country of the Huns and of the Lithuanian pagans,
beyond which lies the great city of Constantine and the kingdom of the
unclean followers of Mahmoud.�

�And beyond that, fair son?�

�Beyond that is Jerusalem and the Holy Land, and the great river which
hath its source in the Garden of Eden.�

�And then?�

�Nay, good father, I cannot tell. Methinks the end of the world is not
far from there.�

�Then we can still find something to teach thee, Alleyne,� said the
Abbot complaisantly. �Know that many strange nations lie betwixt there
and the end of the world. There is the country of the Amazons, and the
country of the dwarfs, and the country of the fair but evil women who
slay with beholding, like the basilisk. Beyond that again is the kingdom
of Prester John and of the great Cham. These things I know for very
sooth, for I had them from that pious Christian and valiant knight, Sir
John de Mandeville, who stopped twice at Beaulieu on his way to and from
Southampton, and discoursed to us concerning what he had seen from the
reader's desk in the refectory, until there was many a good brother who
got neither bit nor sup, so stricken were they by his strange tales.�

�I would fain know, father,� asked the young man, �what there may be at
the end of the world?�

�There are some things,� replied the Abbot gravely, �into which it was
never intended that we should inquire. But you have a long road before
you. Whither will you first turn?�

�To my brother's at Minstead. If he be indeed an ungodly and violent
man, there is the more need that I should seek him out and see whether I
cannot turn him to better ways.�

The Abbot shook his head. �The Socman of Minstead hath earned an evil
name over the country side,� he said. �If you must go to him, see at
least that he doth not turn you from the narrow path upon which you have
learned to tread. But you are in God's keeping, and Godward should you
ever look in danger and in trouble. Above all, shun the snares of women,
for they are ever set for the foolish feet of the young. Kneel down, my
child, and take an old man's blessing.�

Alleyne Edricson bent his head while the Abbot poured out his heartfelt
supplication that Heaven would watch over this young soul, now going
forth into the darkness and danger of the world. It was no mere form for
either of them. To them the outside life of mankind did indeed seem to
be one of violence and of sin, beset with physical and still more with
spiritual danger. Heaven, too, was very near to them in those days.
God's direct agency was to be seen in the thunder and the rainbow,
the whirlwind and the lightning. To the believer, clouds of angels and
confessors, and martyrs, armies of the sainted and the saved, were
ever stooping over their struggling brethren upon earth, raising,
encouraging, and supporting them. It was then with a lighter heart and
a stouter courage that the young man turned from the Abbot's room, while
the latter, following him to the stair-head, finally commended him to
the protection of the holy Julian, patron of travellers.

Underneath, in the porch of the Abbey, the monks had gathered to give
him a last God-speed. Many had brought some parting token by which he
should remember them. There was brother Bartholomew with a crucifix of
rare carved ivory, and brother Luke with a white-backed psalter
adorned with golden bees, and brother Francis with the �Slaying of the
Innocents� most daintily set forth upon vellum. All these were
duly packed away deep in the traveller's scrip, and above them old
pippin-faced brother Athanasius had placed a parcel of simnel bread and
rammel cheese, with a small flask of the famous blue-sealed Abbey wine.
So, amid hand-shakings and laughings and blessings, Alleyne Edricson
turned his back upon Beaulieu.

At the turn of the road he stopped and gazed back. There was the
wide-spread building which he knew so well, the Abbot's house, the long
church, the cloisters with their line of arches, all bathed and mellowed
in the evening sun. There too was the broad sweep of the river Exe, the
old stone well, the canopied niche of the Virgin, and in the centre of
all the cluster of white-robed figures who waved their hands to him. A
sudden mist swam up before the young man's eyes, and he turned away upon
his journey with a heavy heart and a choking throat.



CHAPTER III. HOW HORDLE JOHN COZENED THE FULLER OF LYMINGTON.


It is not, however, in the nature of things that a lad of twenty, with
young life glowing in his veins and all the wide world before him,
should spend his first hours of freedom in mourning for what he had
left. Long ere Alleyne was out of sound of the Beaulieu bells he was
striding sturdily along, swinging his staff and whistling as merrily as
the birds in the thicket. It was an evening to raise a man's heart. The
sun shining slantwise through the trees threw delicate traceries across
the road, with bars of golden light between. Away in the distance
before and behind, the green boughs, now turning in places to a coppery
redness, shot their broad arches across the track. The still summer air
was heavy with the resinous smell of the great forest. Here and there a
tawny brook prattled out from among the underwood and lost itself again
in the ferns and brambles upon the further side. Save the dull piping of
insects and the sough of the leaves, there was silence everywhere--the
sweet restful silence of nature.

And yet there was no want of life--the whole wide wood was full of it.
Now it was a lithe, furtive stoat which shot across the path upon some
fell errand of its own; then it was a wild cat which squatted upon the
outlying branch of an oak and peeped at the traveller with a yellow and
dubious eye. Once it was a wild sow which scuttled out of the bracken,
with two young sounders at her heels, and once a lordly red staggard
walked daintily out from among the tree trunks, and looked around
him with the fearless gaze of one who lived under the King's own high
protection. Alleyne gave his staff a merry flourish, however, and the
red deer bethought him that the King was far off, so streaked away from
whence he came.

The youth had now journeyed considerably beyond the furthest domains of
the Abbey. He was the more surprised therefore when, on coming round a
turn in the path, he perceived a man clad in the familiar garb of the
order, and seated in a clump of heather by the roadside. Alleyne had
known every brother well, but this was a face which was new to him--a
face which was very red and puffed, working this way and that, as
though the man were sore perplexed in his mind. Once he shook both hands
furiously in the air, and twice he sprang from his seat and hurried down
the road. When he rose, however, Alleyne observed that his robe was much
too long and loose for him in every direction, trailing upon the ground
and bagging about his ankles, so that even with trussed-up skirts he
could make little progress. He ran once, but the long gown clogged him
so that he slowed down into a shambling walk, and finally plumped into
the heather once more.

�Young friend,� said he, when Alleyne was abreast of him, �I fear from
thy garb that thou canst know little of the Abbey of Beaulieu.�

�Then you are in error, friend,� the clerk answered, �for I have spent
all my days within its walls.�

�Hast so indeed?� cried he. �Then perhaps canst tell me the name of
a great loathly lump of a brother wi' freckled face an' a hand like a
spade. His eyes were black an' his hair was red an' his voice like
the parish bull. I trow that there cannot be two alike in the same
cloisters.�

�That surely can be no other than brother John,� said Alleyne. �I trust
he has done you no wrong, that you should be so hot against him.�

�Wrong, quotha?� cried the other, jumping out of the heather. �Wrong!
why he hath stolen every plack of clothing off my back, if that be a
wrong, and hath left me here in this sorry frock of white falding, so
that I have shame to go back to my wife, lest she think that I have
donned her old kirtle. Harrow and alas that ever I should have met him!�

�But how came this?� asked the young clerk, who could scarce keep from
laughter at the sight of the hot little man so swathed in the great
white cloak.

�It came in this way,� he said, sitting down once more: �I was passing
this way, hoping to reach Lymington ere nightfall when I came on this
red-headed knave seated even where we are sitting now. I uncovered and
louted as I passed thinking that he might be a holy man at his orisons,
but he called to me and asked me if I had heard speak of the new
indulgence in favor of the Cistercians. 'Not I,' I answered. 'Then the
worse for thy soul!' said he; and with that he broke into a long tale
how that on account of the virtues of the Abbot Berghersh it had been
decreed by the Pope that whoever should wear the habit of a monk of
Beaulieu for as long as he might say the seven psalms of David should be
assured of the kingdom of Heaven. When I heard this I prayed him on
my knees that he would give me the use of his gown, which after many
contentions he at last agreed to do, on my paying him three marks
towards the regilding of the image of Laurence the martyr. Having
stripped his robe, I had no choice but to let him have the wearing of my
good leathern jerkin and hose, for, as he said, it was chilling to
the blood and unseemly to the eye to stand frockless whilst I made my
orisons. He had scarce got them on, and it was a sore labor, seeing that
my inches will scarce match my girth--he had scarce got them on, I say,
and I not yet at the end of the second psalm, when he bade me do honor
to my new dress, and with that set off down the road as fast as feet
would carry him. For myself, I could no more run than if I had been sown
in a sack; so here I sit, and here I am like to sit, before I set eyes
upon my clothes again.�

�Nay, friend, take it not so sadly,� said Alleyne, clapping the
disconsolate one upon the shoulder. �Canst change thy robe for a jerkin
once more at the Abbey, unless perchance you have a friend near at
hand.�

�That have I,� he answered, �and close; but I care not to go nigh him in
this plight, for his wife hath a gibing tongue, and will spread the
tale until I could not show my face in any market from Fordingbridge
to Southampton. But if you, fair sir, out of your kind charity would be
pleased to go a matter of two bow-shots out of your way, you would do me
such a service as I could scarce repay.�

�With all my heart,� said Alleyne readily.

�Then take this pathway on the left, I pray thee, and then the
deer-track which passes on the right. You will then see under a great
beech-tree the hut of a charcoal-burner. Give him my name, good sir,
the name of Peter the fuller, of Lymington, and ask him for a change of
raiment, that I may pursue my journey without delay. There are reasons
why he would be loth to refuse me.�

Alleyne started off along the path indicated, and soon found the log-hut
where the burner dwelt. He was away faggot-cutting in the forest, but
his wife, a ruddy bustling dame, found the needful garments and tied
them into a bundle. While she busied herself in finding and folding
them, Alleyne Edricson stood by the open door looking in at her with
much interest and some distrust, for he had never been so nigh to a
woman before. She had round red arms, a dress of some sober woollen
stuff, and a brass brooch the size of a cheese-cake stuck in the front
of it.

�Peter the fuller!� she kept repeating. �Marry come up! if I were Peter
the fuller's wife I would teach him better than to give his clothes to
the first knave who asks for them. But he was always a poor, fond, silly
creature, was Peter, though we are beholden to him for helping to bury
our second son Wat, who was a 'prentice to him at Lymington in the year
of the Black Death. But who are you, young sir?�

�I am a clerk on my road from Beaulieu to Minstead.�

�Aye, indeed! Hast been brought up at the Abbey then. I could read it
from thy reddened cheek and downcast eye. Hast learned from the monks, I
trow, to fear a woman as thou wouldst a lazar-house. Out upon them! that
they should dishonor their own mothers by such teaching. A pretty world
it would be with all the women out of it.�

�Heaven forfend that such a thing should come to pass!� said Alleyne.

�Amen and amen! But thou art a pretty lad, and the prettier for thy
modest ways. It is easy to see from thy cheek that thou hast not spent
thy days in the rain and the heat and the wind, as my poor Wat hath been
forced to do.�

�I have indeed seen little of life, good dame.�

�Wilt find nothing in it to pay for the loss of thy own freshness. Here
are the clothes, and Peter can leave them when next he comes this way.
Holy Virgin! see the dust upon thy doublet! It were easy to see that
there is no woman to tend to thee. So!--that is better. Now buss me,
boy.�

Alleyne stooped and kissed her, for the kiss was the common salutation
of the age, and, as Erasmus long afterwards remarked, more used in
England than in any other country. Yet it sent the blood to his temples
again, and he wondered, as he turned away, what the Abbot Berghersh
would have answered to so frank an invitation. He was still tingling
from this new experience when he came out upon the high-road and saw a
sight which drove all other thoughts from his mind.

Some way down from where he had left him the unfortunate Peter was
stamping and raving tenfold worse than before. Now, however, instead of
the great white cloak, he had no clothes on at all, save a short woollen
shirt and a pair of leather shoes. Far down the road a long-legged
figure was running, with a bundle under one arm and the other hand to
his side, like a man who laughs until he is sore.

�See him!� yelled Peter. �Look to him! You shall be my witness. He shall
see Winchester jail for this. See where he goes with my cloak under his
arm!�

�Who then?� cried Alleyne.

�Who but that cursed brother John. He hath not left me clothes enough to
make a gallybagger. The double thief hath cozened me out of my gown.�

�Stay though, my friend, it was his gown,� objected Alleyne.

�It boots not. He hath them all--gown, jerkin, hosen and all. Gramercy
to him that he left me the shirt and the shoon. I doubt not that he will
be back for them anon.�

�But how came this?� asked Alleyne, open-eyed with astonishment.

�Are those the clothes? For dear charity's sake give them to me. Not the
Pope himself shall have these from me, though he sent the whole college
of cardinals to ask it. How came it? Why, you had scarce gone ere this
loathly John came running back again, and, when I oped mouth to reproach
him, he asked me whether it was indeed likely that a man of prayer would
leave his own godly raiment in order to take a layman's jerkin. He
had, he said, but gone for a while that I might be the freer for my
devotions. On this I plucked off the gown, and he with much show of
haste did begin to undo his points; but when I threw his frock down
he clipped it up and ran off all untrussed, leaving me in this sorry
plight. He laughed so the while, like a great croaking frog, that I
might have caught him had my breath not been as short as his legs were
long.�

The young man listened to this tale of wrong with all the seriousness
that he could maintain; but at the sight of the pursy red-faced man and
the dignity with which he bore him, the laughter came so thick upon him
that he had to lean up against a tree-trunk. The fuller looked sadly and
gravely at him; but finding that he still laughed, he bowed with much
mock politeness and stalked onwards in his borrowed clothes. Alleyne
watched him until he was small in the distance, and then, wiping the
tears from his eyes, he set off briskly once more upon his journey.



CHAPTER IV. HOW THE BAILIFF OF SOUTHAMPTON SLEW THE TWO MASTERLESS MEN.


The road along which he travelled was scarce as populous as most other
roads in the kingdom, and far less so than those which lie between the
larger towns. Yet from time to time Alleyne met other wayfarers, and
more than once was overtaken by strings of pack mules and horsemen
journeying in the same direction as himself. Once a begging friar came
limping along in a brown habit, imploring in a most dolorous voice to
give him a single groat to buy bread wherewith to save himself from
impending death. Alleyne passed him swiftly by, for he had learned from
the monks to have no love for the wandering friars, and, besides, there
was a great half-gnawed mutton bone sticking out of his pouch to prove
him a liar. Swiftly as he went, however, he could not escape the curse
of the four blessed evangelists which the mendicant howled behind him.
So dreadful are his execrations that the frightened lad thrust his
fingers into his ear-holes, and ran until the fellow was but a brown
smirch upon the yellow road.

Further on, at the edge of the woodland, he came upon a chapman and his
wife, who sat upon a fallen tree. He had put his pack down as a table,
and the two of them were devouring a great pasty, and washing it down
with some drink from a stone jar. The chapman broke a rough jest as he
passed, and the woman called shrilly to Alleyne to come and join them,
on which the man, turning suddenly from mirth to wrath, began to belabor
her with his cudgel. Alleyne hastened on, lest he make more mischief,
and his heart was heavy as lead within him. Look where he would, he
seemed to see nothing but injustice and violence and the hardness of man
to man.

But even as he brooded sadly over it and pined for the sweet peace of
the Abbey, he came on an open space dotted with holly bushes, where was
the strangest sight that he had yet chanced upon. Near to the pathway
lay a long clump of greenery, and from behind this there stuck straight
up into the air four human legs clad in parti-colored hosen, yellow and
black. Strangest of all was when a brisk tune struck suddenly up and
the four legs began to kick and twitter in time to the music. Walking on
tiptoe round the bushes, he stood in amazement to see two men bounding
about on their heads, while they played, the one a viol and the other
a pipe, as merrily and as truly as though they were seated in a choir.
Alleyne crossed himself as he gazed at this unnatural sight, and
could scarce hold his ground with a steady face, when the two dancers,
catching sight of him, came bouncing in his direction. A spear's length
from him, they each threw a somersault into the air, and came down upon
their feet with smirking faces and their hands over their hearts.

�A guerdon--a guerdon, my knight of the staring eyes!� cried one.

�A gift, my prince!� shouted the other. �Any trifle will serve--a purse
of gold, or even a jewelled goblet.�

Alleyne thought of what he had read of demoniac possession--the
jumpings, the twitchings, the wild talk. It was in his mind to repeat
over the exorcism proper to such attacks; but the two burst out
a-laughing at his scared face, and turning on to their heads once more,
clapped their heels in derision.

�Hast never seen tumblers before?� asked the elder, a black-browed,
swarthy man, as brown and supple as a hazel twig. �Why shrink from us,
then, as though we were the spawn of the Evil One?�

�Why shrink, my honey-bird? Why so afeard, my sweet cinnamon?� exclaimed
the other, a loose-jointed lanky youth with a dancing, roguish eye.

�Truly, sirs, it is a new sight to me,� the clerk answered. �When I saw
your four legs above the bush I could scarce credit my own eyes. Why is
it that you do this thing?�

�A dry question to answer,� cried the younger, coming back on to
his feet. �A most husky question, my fair bird! But how? A flask, a
flask!--by all that is wonderful!� He shot out his hand as he spoke, and
plucking Alleyne's bottle out of his scrip, he deftly knocked the neck
off, and poured the half of it down his throat. The rest he handed to
his comrade, who drank the wine, and then, to the clerk's increasing
amazement, made a show of swallowing the bottle, with such skill
that Alleyne seemed to see it vanish down his throat. A moment later,
however, he flung it over his head, and caught it bottom downwards upon
the calf of his left leg.

�We thank you for the wine, kind sir,� said he, �and for the ready
courtesy wherewith you offered it. Touching your question, we may tell
you that we are strollers and jugglers, who, having performed with much
applause at Winchester fair, are now on our way to the great Michaelmas
market at Ringwood. As our art is a very fine and delicate one, however,
we cannot let a day go by without exercising ourselves in it, to which
end we choose some quiet and sheltered spot where we may break our
journey. Here you find us; and we cannot wonder that you, who are new to
tumbling, should be astounded, since many great barons, earls, marshals
and knights, who have wandered as far as the Holy Land, are of one
mind in saying that they have never seen a more noble or gracious
performance. If you will be pleased to sit upon that stump, we will now
continue our exercise.�

Alleyne sat down willingly as directed with two great bundles on
either side of him which contained the strollers' dresses--doublets of
flame-colored silk and girdles of leather, spangled with brass and tin.
The jugglers were on their heads once more, bounding about with rigid
necks, playing the while in perfect time and tune. It chanced that out
of one of the bundles there stuck the end of what the clerk saw to be
a cittern, so drawing it forth, he tuned it up and twanged a harmony to
the merry lilt which the dancers played. On that they dropped their own
instruments, and putting their hands to the ground they hopped about
faster and faster, ever shouting to him to play more briskly, until at
last for very weariness all three had to stop.

�Well played, sweet poppet!� cried the younger. �Hast a rare touch on
the strings.�

�How knew you the tune?� asked the other.

�I knew it not. I did but follow the notes I heard.�

Both opened their eyes at this, and stared at Alleyne with as much
amazement as he had shown at them.

�You have a fine trick of ear then,� said one. �We have long wished to
meet such a man. Wilt join us and jog on to Ringwood? Thy duties shall
be light, and thou shalt have two-pence a day and meat for supper every
night.�

�With as much beer as you can put away,� said the other, �and a flask of
Gascon wine on Sabbaths.�

�Nay, it may not be. I have other work to do. I have tarried with you
over long,� quoth Alleyne, and resolutely set forth upon his journey
once more. They ran behind him some little way, offering him first
fourpence and then sixpence a day, but he only smiled and shook his
head, until at last they fell away from him. Looking back, he saw that
the smaller had mounted on the younger's shoulders, and that they stood
so, some ten feet high, waving their adieus to him. He waved back to
them, and then hastened on, the lighter of heart for having fallen in
with these strange men of pleasure.

Alleyne had gone no great distance for all the many small passages that
had befallen him. Yet to him, used as he was to a life of such quiet
that the failure of a brewing or the altering of an anthem had seemed
to be of the deepest import, the quick changing play of the lights and
shadows of life was strangely startling and interesting. A gulf seemed
to divide this brisk uncertain existence from the old steady round of
work and of prayer which he had left behind him. The few hours that had
passed since he saw the Abbey tower stretched out in his memory until
they outgrew whole months of the stagnant life of the cloister. As he
walked and munched the soft bread from his scrip, it seemed strange to
him to feel that it was still warm from the ovens of Beaulieu.

When he passed Penerley, where were three cottages and a barn, he
reached the edge of the tree country, and found the great barren heath
of Blackdown stretching in front of him, all pink with heather and
bronzed with the fading ferns. On the left the woods were still thick,
but the road edged away from them and wound over the open. The sun lay
low in the west upon a purple cloud, whence it threw a mild, chastening
light over the wild moorland and glittered on the fringe of forest
turning the withered leaves into flakes of dead gold, the brighter for
the black depths behind them. To the seeing eye decay is as fair as
growth, and death as life. The thought stole into Alleyne's heart as he
looked upon the autumnal country side and marvelled at its beauty. He
had little time to dwell upon it however, for there were still six good
miles between him and the nearest inn. He sat down by the roadside
to partake of his bread and cheese, and then with a lighter scrip he
hastened upon his way.

There appeared to be more wayfarers on the down than in the forest.
First he passed two Dominicans in their long black dresses, who swept by
him with downcast looks and pattering lips, without so much as a glance
at him. Then there came a gray friar, or minorite, with a good paunch
upon him, walking slowly and looking about him with the air of a man who
was at peace with himself and with all men. He stopped Alleyne to ask
him whether it was not true that there was a hostel somewhere in those
parts which was especially famous for the stewing of eels. The clerk
having made answer that he had heard the eels of Sowley well spoken of,
the friar sucked in his lips and hurried forward. Close at his heels
came three laborers walking abreast, with spade and mattock over their
shoulders. They sang some rude chorus right tunefully as they walked,
but their English was so coarse and rough that to the ears of a
cloister-bred man it sounded like a foreign and barbarous tongue. One
of them carried a young bittern which they had caught upon the moor, and
they offered it to Alleyne for a silver groat. Very glad he was to get
safely past them, for, with their bristling red beards and their fierce
blue eyes, they were uneasy men to bargain with upon a lonely moor.

Yet it is not always the burliest and the wildest who are the most to
be dreaded. The workers looked hungrily at him, and then jogged onwards
upon their way in slow, lumbering Saxon style. A worse man to deal with
was a wooden-legged cripple who came hobbling down the path, so weak and
so old to all appearance that a child need not stand in fear of him.
Yet when Alleyne had passed him, of a sudden, out of pure devilment, he
screamed out a curse at him, and sent a jagged flint stone hurtling past
his ear. So horrid was the causeless rage of the crooked creature, that
the clerk came over a cold thrill, and took to his heels until he was
out of shot from stone or word. It seemed to him that in this country
of England there was no protection for a man save that which lay in the
strength of his own arm and the speed of his own foot. In the cloisters
he had heard vague talk of the law--the mighty law which was higher than
prelate or baron, yet no sign could he see of it. What was the benefit
of a law written fair upon parchment, he wondered, if there were no
officers to enforce it. As it fell out, however, he had that very
evening, ere the sun had set, a chance of seeing how stern was the grip
of the English law when it did happen to seize the offender.

A mile or so out upon the moor the road takes a very sudden dip into a
hollow, with a peat-colored stream running swiftly down the centre
of it. To the right of this stood, and stands to this day, an ancient
barrow, or burying mound, covered deeply in a bristle of heather and
bracken. Alleyne was plodding down the slope upon one side, when he saw
an old dame coming towards him upon the other, limping with weariness
and leaning heavily upon a stick. When she reached the edge of the
stream she stood helpless, looking to right and to left for some ford.
Where the path ran down a great stone had been fixed in the centre of
the brook, but it was too far from the bank for her aged and uncertain
feet. Twice she thrust forward at it, and twice she drew back, until at
last, giving up in despair, she sat herself down by the brink and
wrung her hands wearily. There she still sat when Alleyne reached the
crossing.

�Come, mother,� quoth he, �it is not so very perilous a passage.�

�Alas! good youth,� she answered, �I have a humor in the eyes, and
though I can see that there is a stone there I can by no means be sure
as to where it lies.�

�That is easily amended,� said he cheerily, and picking her lightly up,
for she was much worn with time, he passed across with her. He could
not but observe, however, that as he placed her down her knees seemed to
fail her, and she could scarcely prop herself up with her staff.

�You are weak, mother,� said he. �Hast journeyed far, I wot.�

�From Wiltshire, friend,� said she, in a quavering voice; �three days
have I been on the road. I go to my son, who is one of the King's
regarders at Brockenhurst. He has ever said that he would care for me in
mine old age.�

�And rightly too, mother, since you cared for him in his youth. But when
have you broken fast?�

�At Lyndenhurst; but alas! my money is at an end, and I could but get a
dish of bran-porridge from the nunnery. Yet I trust that I may be able
to reach Brockenhurst to-night, where I may have all that heart can
desire; for oh! sir, but my son is a fine man, with a kindly heart of
his own, and it is as good as food to me to think that he should have a
doublet of Lincoln green to his back and be the King's own paid man.�

�It is a long road yet to Brockenhurst,� said Alleyne; �but here is such
bread and cheese as I have left, and here, too, is a penny which may
help you to supper. May God be with you!�

�May God be with you, young man!� she cried. �May He make your heart as
glad as you have made mine!� She turned away, still mumbling blessings,
and Alleyne saw her short figure and her long shadow stumbling slowly up
the slope.

He was moving away himself, when his eyes lit upon a strange sight, and
one which sent a tingling through his skin. Out of the tangled scrub on
the old overgrown barrow two human faces were looking out at him; the
sinking sun glimmered full upon them, showing up every line and feature.
The one was an oldish man with a thin beard, a crooked nose, and a broad
red smudge from a birth-mark over his temple; the other was a negro, a
thing rarely met in England at that day, and rarer still in the quiet
southland parts. Alleyne had read of such folk, but had never seen one
before, and could scarce take his eyes from the fellow's broad pouting
lip and shining teeth. Even as he gazed, however, the two came writhing
out from among the heather, and came down towards him with such a
guilty, slinking carriage, that the clerk felt that there was no good in
them, and hastened onwards upon his way.

He had not gained the crown of the slope, when he heard a sudden scuffle
behind him and a feeble voice bleating for help. Looking round, there
was the old dame down upon the roadway, with her red whimple flying on
the breeze, while the two rogues, black and white, stooped over her,
wresting away from her the penny and such other poor trifles as were
worth the taking. At the sight of her thin limbs struggling in weak
resistance, such a glow of fierce anger passed over Alleyne as set his
head in a whirl. Dropping his scrip, he bounded over the stream once
more, and made for the two villains, with his staff whirled over his
shoulder and his gray eyes blazing with fury.

The robbers, however, were not disposed to leave their victim until they
had worked their wicked will upon her. The black man, with the woman's
crimson scarf tied round his swarthy head, stood forward in the centre
of the path, with a long dull-colored knife in his hand, while the
other, waving a ragged cudgel, cursed at Alleyne and dared him to
come on. His blood was fairly aflame, however, and he needed no such
challenge. Dashing at the black man, he smote at him with such good will
that the other let his knife tinkle into the roadway, and hopped howling
to a safer distance. The second rogue, however, made of sterner stuff,
rushed in upon the clerk, and clipped him round the waist with a grip
like a bear, shouting the while to his comrade to come round and stab
him in the back. At this the negro took heart of grace, and picking up
his dagger again he came stealing with prowling step and murderous eye,
while the two swayed backwards and forwards, staggering this way and
that. In the very midst of the scuffle, however, whilst Alleyne braced
himself to feel the cold blade between his shoulders, there came a
sudden scurry of hoofs, and the black man yelled with terror and ran
for his life through the heather. The man with the birth-mark, too,
struggled to break away, and Alleyne heard his teeth chatter and felt
his limbs grow limp to his hand. At this sign of coming aid the clerk
held on the tighter, and at last was able to pin his man down and
glanced behind him to see where all the noise was coming from.

Down the slanting road there was riding a big, burly man, clad in a
tunic of purple velvet and driving a great black horse as hard as
it could gallop. He leaned well over its neck as he rode, and made a
heaving with his shoulders at every bound as though he were lifting the
steed instead of it carrying him. In the rapid glance Alleyne saw that
he had white doeskin gloves, a curling white feather in his flat velvet
cap, and a broad gold, embroidered baldric across his bosom. Behind him
rode six others, two and two, clad in sober brown jerkins, with the
long yellow staves of their bows thrusting out from behind their right
shoulders. Down the hill they thundered, over the brook and up to the
scene of the contest.

�Here is one!� said the leader, springing down from his reeking horse,
and seizing the white rogue by the edge of his jerkin. �This is one of
them. I know him by that devil's touch upon his brow. Where are your
cords, Peterkin? So! Bind him hand and foot. His last hour has come. And
you, young man, who may you be?�

�I am a clerk, sir, travelling from Beaulieu.�

�A clerk!� cried the other. �Art from Oxenford or from Cambridge? Hast
thou a letter from the chancellor of thy college giving thee a permit
to beg? Let me see thy letter.� He had a stern, square face, with bushy
side whiskers and a very questioning eye.

�I am from Beaulieu Abbey, and I have no need to beg,� said Alleyne, who
was all of a tremble now that the ruffle was over.

�The better for thee,� the other answered. �Dost know who I am?�

�No, sir, I do not.�

�I am the law!�--nodding his head solemnly. �I am the law of England
and the mouthpiece of his most gracious and royal majesty, Edward the
Third.�

Alleyne louted low to the King's representative. �Truly you came in good
time, honored sir,� said he. �A moment later and they would have slain
me.�

�But there should be another one,� cried the man in the purple coat.
�There should be a black man. A shipman with St. Anthony's fire, and a
black man who had served him as cook--those are the pair that we are in
chase of.�

�The black man fled over to that side,� said Alleyne, pointing towards
the barrow.

�He could not have gone far, sir bailiff,� cried one of the archers,
unslinging his bow. �He is in hiding somewhere, for he knew well, black
paynim as he is, that our horses' four legs could outstrip his two.�

�Then we shall have him,� said the other. �It shall never be said,
whilst I am bailiff of Southampton, that any waster, riever, draw-latch
or murtherer came scathless away from me and my posse. Leave that rogue
lying. Now stretch out in line, my merry ones, with arrow on string, and
I shall show you such sport as only the King can give. You on the left,
Howett, and Thomas of Redbridge upon the right. So! Beat high and low
among the heather, and a pot of wine to the lucky marksman.�

As it chanced, however, the searchers had not far to seek. The negro had
burrowed down into his hiding-place upon the barrow, where he might have
lain snug enough, had it not been for the red gear upon his head. As
he raised himself to look over the bracken at his enemies, the staring
color caught the eye of the bailiff, who broke into a long screeching
whoop and spurred forward sword in hand. Seeing himself discovered,
the man rushed out from his hiding-place, and bounded at the top of
his speed down the line of archers, keeping a good hundred paces to the
front of them. The two who were on either side of Alleyne bent their
bows as calmly as though they were shooting at the popinjay at the
village fair.

�Seven yards windage, Hal,� said one, whose hair was streaked with gray.

�Five,� replied the other, letting loose his string. Alleyne gave a gulp
in his throat, for the yellow streak seemed to pass through the man; but
he still ran forward.

�Seven, you jack-fool,� growled the first speaker, and his bow twanged
like a harp-string. The black man sprang high up into the air, and
shot out both his arms and his legs, coming down all a-sprawl among
the heather. �Right under the blade bone!� quoth the archer, sauntering
forward for his arrow.

�The old hound is the best when all is said,� quoth the bailiff of
Southampton, as they made back for the roadway. �That means a quart of
the best malmsey in Southampton this very night, Matthew Atwood. Art
sure that he is dead?�

�Dead as Pontius Pilate, worshipful sir.�

�It is well. Now, as to the other knave. There are trees and to spare
over yonder, but we have scarce leisure to make for them. Draw thy
sword, Thomas of Redbridge, and hew me his head from his shoulders.�

�A boon, gracious sir, a boon!� cried the condemned man.

�What then?� asked the bailiff.

�I will confess to my crime. It was indeed I and the black cook, both
from the ship 'La Rose de Gloire,' of Southampton, who did set upon the
Flanders merchant and rob him of his spicery and his mercery, for which,
as we well know, you hold a warrant against us.�

�There is little merit in this confession,� quoth the bailiff sternly.
�Thou hast done evil within my bailiwick, and must die.�

�But, sir,� urged Alleyne, who was white to the lips at these bloody
doings, �he hath not yet come to trial.�

�Young clerk,� said the bailiff, �you speak of that of which you know
nothing. It is true that he hath not come to trial, but the trial hath
come to him. He hath fled the law and is beyond its pale. Touch not that
which is no concern of thine. But what is this boon, rogue, which you
would crave?�

�I have in my shoe, most worshipful sir, a strip of wood which belonged
once to the bark wherein the blessed Paul was dashed up against the
island of Melita. I bought it for two rose nobles from a shipman who
came from the Levant. The boon I crave is that you will place it in my
hands and let me die still grasping it. In this manner, not only shall
my own eternal salvation be secured, but thine also, for I shall never
cease to intercede for thee.�

At the command of the bailiff they plucked off the fellow's shoe, and
there sure enough at the side of the instep, wrapped in a piece of fine
sendall, lay a long, dark splinter of wood. The archers doffed caps at
the sight of it, and the bailiff crossed himself devoutly as he handed
it to the robber.

�If it should chance,� he said, �that through the surpassing merits of
the blessed Paul your sin-stained soul should gain a way into paradise,
I trust that you will not forget that intercession which you have
promised. Bear in mind too, that it is Herward the bailiff for whom you
pray, and not Herward the sheriff, who is my uncle's son. Now, Thomas, I
pray you dispatch, for we have a long ride before us and sun has already
set.�

Alleyne gazed upon the scene--the portly velvet-clad official, the knot
of hard-faced archers with their hands to the bridles of their horses,
the thief with his arms trussed back and his doublet turned down upon
his shoulders. By the side of the track the old dame was standing,
fastening her red whimple once more round her head. Even as he looked
one of the archers drew his sword with a sharp whirr of steel and stept
up to the lost man. The clerk hurried away in horror; but, ere he
had gone many paces, he heard a sudden, sullen thump, with a choking,
whistling sound at the end of it. A minute later the bailiff and four
of his men rode past him on their journey back to Southampton, the other
two having been chosen as grave-diggers. As they passed Alleyne saw that
one of the men was wiping his sword-blade upon the mane of his horse.
A deadly sickness came over him at the sight, and sitting down by the
wayside he burst out weeping, with his nerves all in a jangle. It was a
terrible world thought he, and it was hard to know which were the most
to be dreaded, the knaves or the men of the law.



CHAPTER V. HOW A STRANGE COMPANY GATHERED AT THE �PIED MERLIN.�


The night had already fallen, and the moon was shining between the rifts
of ragged, drifting clouds, before Alleyne Edricson, footsore and weary
from the unwonted exercise, found himself in front of the forest inn
which stood upon the outskirts of Lyndhurst. The building was long and
low, standing back a little from the road, with two flambeaux blazing on
either side of the door as a welcome to the traveller. From one window
there thrust forth a long pole with a bunch of greenery tied to the end
of it--a sign that liquor was to be sold within. As Alleyne walked up to
it he perceived that it was rudely fashioned out of beams of wood, with
twinkling lights all over where the glow from within shone through the
chinks. The roof was poor and thatched; but in strange contrast to
it there ran all along under the eaves a line of wooden shields, most
gorgeously painted with chevron, bend, and saltire, and every heraldic
device. By the door a horse stood tethered, the ruddy glow beating
strongly upon his brown head and patient eyes, while his body stood back
in the shadow.

Alleyne stood still in the roadway for a few minutes reflecting
upon what he should do. It was, he knew, only a few miles further to
Minstead, where his brother dwelt. On the other hand, he had never seen
this brother since childhood, and the reports which had come to his ears
concerning him were seldom to his advantage. By all accounts he was a
hard and a bitter man.

It might be an evil start to come to his door so late and claim the
shelter of his roof. Better to sleep here at this inn, and then travel
on to Minstead in the morning. If his brother would take him in, well
and good.

He would bide with him for a time and do what he might to serve him.
If, on the other hand, he should have hardened his heart against him,
he could only go on his way and do the best he might by his skill as
a craftsman and a scrivener. At the end of a year he would be free
to return to the cloisters, for such had been his father's bequest. A
monkish upbringing, one year in the world after the age of twenty, and
then a free selection one way or the other--it was a strange course
which had been marked out for him. Such as it was, however, he had no
choice but to follow it, and if he were to begin by making a friend
of his brother he had best wait until morning before he knocked at his
dwelling.

The rude plank door was ajar, but as Alleyne approached it there came
from within such a gust of rough laughter and clatter of tongues that
he stood irresolute upon the threshold. Summoning courage, however, and
reflecting that it was a public dwelling, in which he had as much right
as any other man, he pushed it open and stepped into the common room.

Though it was an autumn evening and somewhat warm, a huge fire of heaped
billets of wood crackled and sparkled in a broad, open grate, some of
the smoke escaping up a rude chimney, but the greater part rolling out
into the room, so that the air was thick with it, and a man coming from
without could scarce catch his breath. On this fire a great cauldron
bubbled and simmered, giving forth a rich and promising smell. Seated
round it were a dozen or so folk, of all ages and conditions, who set
up such a shout as Alleyne entered that he stood peering at them through
the smoke, uncertain what this riotous greeting might portend.

�A rouse! A rouse!� cried one rough looking fellow in a tattered jerkin.
�One more round of mead or ale and the score to the last comer.�

�'Tis the law of the 'Pied Merlin,'� shouted another. �Ho there, Dame
Eliza! Here is fresh custom come to the house, and not a drain for the
company.�

�I will take your orders, gentles; I will assuredly take your orders,�
 the landlady answered, bustling in with her hands full of leathern
drinking-cups. �What is it that you drink, then? Beer for the lads of
the forest, mead for the gleeman, strong waters for the tinker, and wine
for the rest. It is an old custom of the house, young sir. It has been
the use at the 'Pied Merlin' this many a year back that the company
should drink to the health of the last comer. Is it your pleasure to
humor it?�

�Why, good dame,� said Alleyne, �I would not offend the customs of your
house, but it is only sooth when I say that my purse is a thin one. As
far as two pence will go, however, I shall be right glad to do my part.�

�Plainly said and bravely spoken, my suckling friar,� roared a deep
voice, and a heavy hand fell upon Alleyne's shoulder. Looking up, he saw
beside him his former cloister companion the renegade monk, Hordle John.

�By the thorn of Glastonbury! ill days are coming upon Beaulieu,� said
he. �Here they have got rid in one day of the only two men within their
walls--for I have had mine eyes upon thee, youngster, and I know that
for all thy baby-face there is the making of a man in thee. Then there
is the Abbot, too. I am no friend of his, nor he of mine; but he has
warm blood in his veins. He is the only man left among them. The others,
what are they?�

�They are holy men,� Alleyne answered gravely.

�Holy men? Holy cabbages! Holy bean-pods! What do they do but live and
suck in sustenance and grow fat? If that be holiness, I could show you
hogs in this forest who are fit to head the calendar. Think you it was
for such a life that this good arm was fixed upon my shoulder, or that
head placed upon your neck? There is work in the world, man, and it is
not by hiding behind stone walls that we shall do it.�

�Why, then, did you join the brothers?� asked Alleyne.

�A fair enough question; but it is as fairly answered. I joined them
because Margery Alspaye, of Bolder, married Crooked Thomas of Ringwood,
and left a certain John of Hordle in the cold, for that he was a
ranting, roving blade who was not to be trusted in wedlock. That was
why, being fond and hot-headed, I left the world; and that is why,
having had time to take thought, I am right glad to find myself back in
it once more. Ill betide the day that ever I took off my yeoman's jerkin
to put on the white gown!�

Whilst he was speaking the landlady came in again, bearing a broad
platter, upon which stood all the beakers and flagons charged to the
brim with the brown ale or the ruby wine. Behind her came a maid with
a high pile of wooden plates, and a great sheaf of spoons, one of which
she handed round to each of the travellers. Two of the company, who were
dressed in the weather-stained green doublet of foresters, lifted the
big pot off the fire, and a third, with a huge pewter ladle, served out
a portion of steaming collops to each guest. Alleyne bore his share and
his ale-mug away with him to a retired trestle in the corner, where he
could sup in peace and watch the strange scene, which was so different
to those silent and well-ordered meals to which he was accustomed.

The room was not unlike a stable. The low ceiling, smoke-blackened and
dingy, was pierced by several square trap-doors with rough-hewn ladders
leading up to them. The walls of bare unpainted planks were studded
here and there with great wooden pins, placed at irregular intervals
and heights, from which hung over-tunics, wallets, whips, bridles, and
saddles. Over the fireplace were suspended six or seven shields of
wood, with coats-of-arms rudely daubed upon them, which showed by their
varying degrees of smokiness and dirt that they had been placed there
at different periods. There was no furniture, save a single long
dresser covered with coarse crockery, and a number of wooden benches and
trestles, the legs of which sank deeply into the soft clay floor, while
the only light, save that of the fire, was furnished by three torches
stuck in sockets on the wall, which flickered and crackled, giving
forth a strong resinous odor. All this was novel and strange to the
cloister-bred youth; but most interesting of all was the motley circle
of guests who sat eating their collops round the blaze. They were a
humble group of wayfarers, such as might have been found that night
in any inn through the length and breadth of England; but to him they
represented that vague world against which he had been so frequently and
so earnestly warned. It did not seem to him from what he could see of it
to be such a very wicked place after all.

Three or four of the men round the fire were evidently underkeepers
and verderers from the forest, sunburned and bearded, with the quick
restless eye and lithe movements of the deer among which they lived.
Close to the corner of the chimney sat a middle-aged gleeman, clad in a
faded garb of Norwich cloth, the tunic of which was so outgrown that it
did not fasten at the neck and at the waist. His face was swollen and
coarse, and his watery protruding eyes spoke of a life which never
wandered very far from the wine-pot. A gilt harp, blotched with many
stains and with two of its strings missing, was tucked under one of his
arms, while with the other he scooped greedily at his platter. Next to
him sat two other men of about the same age, one with a trimming of fur
to his coat, which gave him a dignity which was evidently dearer to him
than his comfort, for he still drew it round him in spite of the hot
glare of the faggots. The other, clad in a dirty russet suit with a long
sweeping doublet, had a cunning, foxy face with keen, twinkling eyes and
a peaky beard. Next to him sat Hordle John, and beside him three other
rough unkempt fellows with tangled beards and matted hair--free laborers
from the adjoining farms, where small patches of freehold property
had been suffered to remain scattered about in the heart of the royal
demesne. The company was completed by a peasant in a rude dress of
undyed sheepskin, with the old-fashioned galligaskins about his legs,
and a gayly dressed young man with striped cloak jagged at the edges
and parti-colored hosen, who looked about him with high disdain upon his
face, and held a blue smelling-flask to his nose with one hand, while he
brandished a busy spoon with the other. In the corner a very fat man was
lying all a-sprawl upon a truss, snoring stertorously, and evidently in
the last stage of drunkenness.

�That is Wat the limner,� quoth the landlady, sitting down beside
Alleyne, and pointing with the ladle to the sleeping man. �That is he
who paints the signs and the tokens. Alack and alas that ever I should
have been fool enough to trust him! Now, young man, what manner of a
bird would you suppose a pied merlin to be--that being the proper sign
of my hostel?�

�Why,� said Alleyne, �a merlin is a bird of the same form as an eagle or
a falcon. I can well remember that learned brother Bartholomew, who is
deep in all the secrets of nature, pointed one out to me as we walked
together near Vinney Ridge.�

�A falcon or an eagle, quotha? And pied, that is of two several colors.
So any man would say except this barrel of lies. He came to me, look
you, saying that if I would furnish him with a gallon of ale, wherewith
to strengthen himself as he worked, and also the pigments and a board,
he would paint for me a noble pied merlin which I might hang along with
the blazonry over my door. I, poor simple fool, gave him the ale and all
that he craved, leaving him alone too, because he said that a man's mind
must be left untroubled when he had great work to do. When I came back
the gallon jar was empty, and he lay as you see him, with the board in
front of him with this sorry device.� She raised up a panel which was
leaning against the wall, and showed a rude painting of a scraggy and
angular fowl, with very long legs and a spotted body.

�Was that,� she asked, �like the bird which thou hast seen?�

Alleyne shook his head, smiling.

�No, nor any other bird that ever wagged a feather. It is most like a
plucked pullet which has died of the spotted fever. And scarlet too!
What would the gentles Sir Nicholas Boarhunte, or Sir Bernard Brocas, of
Roche Court, say if they saw such a thing--or, perhaps, even the King's
own Majesty himself, who often has ridden past this way, and who loves
his falcons as he loves his sons? It would be the downfall of my house.�

�The matter is not past mending,� said Alleyne. �I pray you, good dame,
to give me those three pigment-pots and the brush, and I shall try
whether I cannot better this painting.�

Dame Eliza looked doubtfully at him, as though fearing some other
stratagem, but, as he made no demand for ale, she finally brought the
paints, and watched him as he smeared on his background, talking the
while about the folk round the fire.

�The four forest lads must be jogging soon,� she said. �They bide at
Emery Down, a mile or more from here. Yeomen prickers they are, who tend
to the King's hunt. The gleeman is called Floyting Will. He comes from
the north country, but for many years he hath gone the round of the
forest from Southampton to Christchurch. He drinks much and pays little
but it would make your ribs crackle to hear him sing the 'Jest of Hendy
Tobias.' Mayhap he will sing it when the ale has warmed him.�

�Who are those next to him?� asked Alleyne, much interested. �He of the
fur mantle has a wise and reverent face.�

�He is a seller of pills and salves, very learned in humors, and rheums,
and fluxes, and all manner of ailments. He wears, as you perceive, the
vernicle of Sainted Luke, the first physician, upon his sleeve. May good
St. Thomas of Kent grant that it may be long before either I or mine
need his help! He is here to-night for herbergage, as are the others
except the foresters. His neighbor is a tooth-drawer. That bag at his
girdle is full of the teeth that he drew at Winchester fair. I warrant
that there are more sound ones than sorry, for he is quick at his work
and a trifle dim in the eye. The lusty man next him with the red head
I have not seen before. The four on this side are all workers, three
of them in the service of the bailiff of Sir Baldwin Redvers, and the
other, he with the sheepskin, is, as I hear, a villein from the midlands
who hath run from his master. His year and day are well-nigh up, when he
will be a free man.�

�And the other?� asked Alleyne in a whisper. �He is surely some very
great man, for he looks as though he scorned those who were about him.�

The landlady looked at him in a motherly way and shook her head. �You
have had no great truck with the world,� she said, �or you would have
learned that it is the small men and not the great who hold their noses
in the air. Look at those shields upon my wall and under my eaves. Each
of them is the device of some noble lord or gallant knight who hath
slept under my roof at one time or another. Yet milder men or easier to
please I have never seen: eating my bacon and drinking my wine with a
merry face, and paying my score with some courteous word or jest which
was dearer to me than my profit. Those are the true gentles. But your
chapman or your bearward will swear that there is a lime in the wine,
and water in the ale, and fling off at the last with a curse instead of
a blessing. This youth is a scholar from Cambrig, where men are wont to
be blown out by a little knowledge, and lose the use of their hands in
learning the laws of the Romans. But I must away to lay down the beds.
So may the saints keep you and prosper you in your undertaking!�

Thus left to himself, Alleyne drew his panel of wood where the light of
one of the torches would strike full upon it, and worked away with all
the pleasure of the trained craftsman, listening the while to the talk
which went on round the fire. The peasant in the sheepskins, who had
sat glum and silent all evening, had been so heated by his flagon of ale
that he was talking loudly and angrily with clenched hands and flashing
eyes.

�Sir Humphrey Tennant of Ashby may till his own fields for me,� he
cried. �The castle has thrown its shadow upon the cottage over long.
For three hundred years my folk have swinked and sweated, day in and day
out, to keep the wine on the lord's table and the harness on the lord's
back. Let him take off his plates and delve himself, if delving must be
done.�

�A proper spirit, my fair son!� said one of the free laborers. �I would
that all men were of thy way of thinking.�

�He would have sold me with his acres,� the other cried, in a
voice which was hoarse with passion. �'The man, the woman and their
litter'--so ran the words of the dotard bailiff. Never a bullock on the
farm was sold more lightly. Ha! he may wake some black night to find
the flames licking about his ears--for fire is a good friend to the
poor man, and I have seen a smoking heap of ashes where over night there
stood just such another castlewick as Ashby.�

�This is a lad of mettle!� shouted another of the laborers. �He dares to
give tongue to what all men think. Are we not all from Adam's loins, all
with flesh and blood, and with the same mouth that must needs have food
and drink? Where all this difference then between the ermine cloak and
the leathern tunic, if what they cover is the same?�

�Aye, Jenkin,� said another, �our foeman is under the stole and the
vestment as much as under the helmet and plate of proof. We have as much
to fear from the tonsure as from the hauberk. Strike at the noble and
the priest shrieks, strike at priest and the noble lays his hand upon
glaive. They are twin thieves who live upon our labor.�

�It would take a clever man to live upon thy labor, Hugh,� remarked one
of the foresters, �seeing that the half of thy time is spent in swilling
mead at the 'Pied Merlin.'�

�Better that than stealing the deer that thou art placed to guard, like
some folk I know.�

�If you dare open that swine's mouth against me,� shouted the woodman,
�I'll crop your ears for you before the hangman has the doing of it,
thou long-jawed lackbrain.�

�Nay, gentles, gentles!� cried Dame Eliza, in a singsong heedless voice,
which showed that such bickerings were nightly things among her guests.
�No brawling or brabbling, gentles! Take heed to the good name of the
house.�

�Besides, if it comes to the cropping of ears, there are other folk who
may say their say,� quoth the third laborer. �We are all freemen, and
I trow that a yeoman's cudgel is as good as a forester's knife. By
St. Anselm! it would be an evil day if we had to bend to our master's
servants as well as to our masters.�

�No man is my master save the King,� the woodman answered. �Who is
there, save a false traitor, who would refuse to serve the English
king?�

�I know not about the English king,� said the man Jenkin. �What sort of
English king is it who cannot lay his tongue to a word of English? You
mind last year when he came down to Malwood, with his inner marshal and
his outer marshal, his justiciar, his seneschal, and his four and twenty
guardsmen. One noontide I was by Franklin Swinton's gate, when up he
rides with a yeoman pricker at his heels. 'Ouvre,' he cried, 'ouvre,' or
some such word, making signs for me to open the gate; and then 'Merci,'
as though he were adrad of me. And you talk of an English king?�

�I do not marvel at it,� cried the Cambrig scholar, speaking in the high
drawling voice which was common among his class. �It is not a tongue
for men of sweet birth and delicate upbringing. It is a foul, snorting,
snarling manner of speech. For myself, I swear by the learned Polycarp
that I have most ease with Hebrew, and after that perchance with
Arabian.�

�I will not hear a word said against old King Ned,� cried Hordle John
in a voice like a bull. �What if he is fond of a bright eye and a saucy
face. I know one of his subjects who could match him at that. If
he cannot speak like an Englishman I trow that he can fight like an
Englishman, and he was hammering at the gates of Paris while ale-house
topers were grutching and grumbling at home.�

This loud speech, coming from a man of so formidable an appearance,
somewhat daunted the disloyal party, and they fell into a sullen
silence, which enabled Alleyne to hear something of the talk which was
going on in the further corner between the physician, the tooth-drawer
and the gleeman.

�A raw rat,� the man of drugs was saying, �that is what it is ever my
use to order for the plague--a raw rat with its paunch cut open.�

�Might it not be broiled, most learned sir?� asked the tooth-drawer. �A
raw rat sounds a most sorry and cheerless dish.�

�Not to be eaten,� cried the physician, in high disdain. �Why should any
man eat such a thing?�

�Why indeed?� asked the gleeman, taking a long drain at his tankard.

�It is to be placed on the sore or swelling. For the rat, mark you,
being a foul-living creature, hath a natural drawing or affinity for
all foul things, so that the noxious humors pass from the man into the
unclean beast.�

�Would that cure the black death, master?� asked Jenkin.

�Aye, truly would it, my fair son.�

�Then I am right glad that there were none who knew of it. The black
death is the best friend that ever the common folk had in England.�

�How that then?� asked Hordle John.

�Why, friend, it is easy to see that you have not worked with your hands
or you would not need to ask. When half the folk in the country were
dead it was then that the other half could pick and choose who they
would work for, and for what wage. That is why I say that the murrain
was the best friend that the borel folk ever had.�

�True, Jenkin,� said another workman; �but it is not all good that is
brought by it either. We well know that through it corn-land has been
turned into pasture, so that flocks of sheep with perchance a single
shepherd wander now where once a hundred men had work and wage.�

�There is no great harm in that,� remarked the tooth-drawer, �for the
sheep give many folk their living. There is not only the herd, but the
shearer and brander, and then the dresser, the curer, the dyer, the
fuller, the webster, the merchant, and a score of others.�

�If it come to that.� said one of the foresters, �the tough meat of them
will wear folks teeth out, and there is a trade for the man who can draw
them.�

A general laugh followed this sally at the dentist's expense, in the
midst of which the gleeman placed his battered harp upon his knee, and
began to pick out a melody upon the frayed strings.

�Elbow room for Floyting Will!� cried the woodmen. �Twang us a merry
lilt.�

�Aye, aye, the 'Lasses of Lancaster,'� one suggested.

�Or 'St. Simeon and the Devil.'�

�Or the 'Jest of Hendy Tobias.'�

To all these suggestions the jongleur made no response, but sat with his
eye fixed abstractedly upon the ceiling, as one who calls words to his
mind. Then, with a sudden sweep across the strings, he broke out into
a song so gross and so foul that ere he had finished a verse the
pure-minded lad sprang to his feet with the blood tingling in his face.

�How can you sing such things?� he cried. �You, too, an old man who
should be an example to others.�

The wayfarers all gazed in the utmost astonishment at the interruption.

�By the holy Dicon of Hampole! our silent clerk has found his tongue,�
 said one of the woodmen. �What is amiss with the song then? How has it
offended your babyship?�

�A milder and better mannered song hath never been heard within these
walls,� cried another. �What sort of talk is this for a public inn?�

�Shall it be a litany, my good clerk?� shouted a third; �or would a hymn
be good enough to serve?�

The jongleur had put down his harp in high dudgeon. �Am I to be preached
to by a child?� he cried, staring across at Alleyne with an inflamed and
angry countenance. �Is a hairless infant to raise his tongue against me,
when I have sung in every fair from Tweed to Trent, and have twice been
named aloud by the High Court of the Minstrels at Beverley? I shall sing
no more to-night.�

�Nay, but you will so,� said one of the laborers. �Hi, Dame Eliza, bring
a stoup of your best to Will to clear his throat. Go forward with thy
song, and if our girl-faced clerk does not love it he can take to the
road and go whence he came.�

�Nay, but not too fast,� broke in Hordle John. �There are two words in
this matter. It may be that my little comrade has been over quick in
reproof, he having gone early into the cloisters and seen little of the
rough ways and words of the world. Yet there is truth in what he says,
for, as you know well, the song was not of the cleanest. I shall stand
by him, therefore, and he shall neither be put out on the road, nor
shall his ears be offended indoors.�

�Indeed, your high and mighty grace,� sneered one of the yeomen, �have
you in sooth so ordained?�

�By the Virgin!� said a second, �I think that you may both chance to
find yourselves upon the road before long.�

�And so belabored as to be scarce able to crawl along it,� cried a
third.

�Nay, I shall go! I shall go!� said Alleyne hurriedly, as Hordle John
began to slowly roll up his sleeve, and bare an arm like a leg of
mutton. �I would not have you brawl about me.�

�Hush! lad,� he whispered, �I count them not a fly. They may find they
have more tow on their distaff than they know how to spin. Stand thou
clear and give me space.�

Both the foresters and the laborers had risen from their bench, and Dame
Eliza and the travelling doctor had flung themselves between the two
parties with soft words and soothing gestures, when the door of the
�Pied Merlin� was flung violently open, and the attention of the company
was drawn from their own quarrel to the new-comer who had burst so
unceremoniously upon them.



CHAPTER VI. HOW SAMKIN AYLWARD WAGERED HIS FEATHER-BED.


He was a middle-sized man, of most massive and robust build, with an
arching chest and extraordinary breadth of shoulder. His shaven face was
as brown as a hazel-nut, tanned and dried by the weather, with harsh,
well-marked features, which were not improved by a long white scar which
stretched from the corner of his left nostril to the angle of the jaw.
His eyes were bright and searching, with something of menace and of
authority in their quick glitter, and his mouth was firm-set and hard,
as befitted one who was wont to set his face against danger. A straight
sword by his side and a painted long-bow jutting over his shoulder
proclaimed his profession, while his scarred brigandine of chain-mail
and his dinted steel cap showed that he was no holiday soldier, but one
who was even now fresh from the wars. A white surcoat with the lion
of St. George in red upon the centre covered his broad breast, while a
sprig of new-plucked broom at the side of his head-gear gave a touch of
gayety and grace to his grim, war-worn equipment.

�Ha!� he cried, blinking like an owl in the sudden glare. �Good even
to you, comrades! Hola! a woman, by my soul!� and in an instant he had
clipped Dame Eliza round the waist and was kissing her violently. His
eye happening to wander upon the maid, however, he instantly abandoned
the mistress and danced off after the other, who scurried in confusion
up one of the ladders, and dropped the heavy trap-door upon her pursuer.
He then turned back and saluted the landlady once more with the utmost
relish and satisfaction.

�La petite is frightened,� said he. �Ah, c'est l'amour, l'amour! Curse
this trick of French, which will stick to my throat. I must wash it out
with some good English ale. By my hilt! camarades, there is no drop of
French blood in my body, and I am a true English bowman, Samkin Aylward
by name; and I tell you, mes amis, that it warms my very heart-roots to
set my feet on the dear old land once more. When I came off the galley
at Hythe, this very day, I down on my bones, and I kissed the good brown
earth, as I kiss thee now, ma belle, for it was eight long years since
I had seen it. The very smell of it seemed life to me. But where are my
six rascals? Hola, there! En avant!�

At the order, six men, dressed as common drudges, marched solemnly
into the room, each bearing a huge bundle upon his head. They formed in
military line, while the soldier stood in front of them with stern eyes,
checking off their several packages.

�Number one--a French feather-bed with the two counter-panes of white
sendall,� said he.

�Here, worthy sir,� answered the first of the bearers, laying a great
package down in the corner.

�Number two--seven ells of red Turkey cloth and nine ells of cloth of
gold. Put it down by the other. Good dame, I prythee give each of these
men a bottrine of wine or a jack of ale. Three--a full piece of white
Genoan velvet with twelve ells of purple silk. Thou rascal, there is
dirt on the hem! Thou hast brushed it against some wall, coquin!�

�Not I, most worthy sir,� cried the carrier, shrinking away from the
fierce eyes of the bowman.

�I say yes, dog! By the three kings! I have seen a man gasp out his last
breath for less. Had you gone through the pain and unease that I have
done to earn these things you would be at more care. I swear by my ten
finger-bones that there is not one of them that hath not cost its weight
in French blood! Four--an incense-boat, a ewer of silver, a gold buckle
and a cope worked in pearls. I found them, camarades, at the Church of
St. Denis in the harrying of Narbonne, and I took them away with me lest
they fall into the hands of the wicked. Five--a cloak of fur turned
up with minever, a gold goblet with stand and cover, and a box of
rose-colored sugar. See that you lay them together. Six--a box of
monies, three pounds of Limousine gold-work, a pair of boots, silver
tagged, and, lastly, a store of naping linen. So, the tally is complete!
Here is a groat apiece, and you may go.�

�Go whither, worthy sir?� asked one of the carriers.

�Whither? To the devil if ye will. What is it to me? Now, ma belle, to
supper. A pair of cold capons, a mortress of brawn, or what you will,
with a flask or two of the right Gascony. I have crowns in my pouch,
my sweet, and I mean to spend them. Bring in wine while the food is
dressing. Buvons my brave lads; you shall each empty a stoup with me.�

Here was an offer which the company in an English inn at that or any
other date are slow to refuse. The flagons were re-gathered and came
back with the white foam dripping over their edges. Two of the woodmen
and three of the laborers drank their portions off hurriedly and trooped
off together, for their homes were distant and the hour late. The
others, however, drew closer, leaving the place of honor to the right
of the gleeman to the free-handed new-comer. He had thrown off his steel
cap and his brigandine, and had placed them with his sword, his quiver
and his painted long-bow, on the top of his varied heap of plunder in
the corner. Now, with his thick and somewhat bowed legs stretched in
front of the blaze, his green jerkin thrown open, and a great quart
pot held in his corded fist, he looked the picture of comfort and of
good-fellowship. His hard-set face had softened, and the thick crop of
crisp brown curls which had been hidden by his helmet grew low upon his
massive neck. He might have been forty years of age, though hard toil
and harder pleasure had left their grim marks upon his features. Alleyne
had ceased painting his pied merlin, and sat, brush in hand, staring
with open eyes at a type of man so strange and so unlike any whom he had
met. Men had been good or had been bad in his catalogue, but here was a
man who was fierce one instant and gentle the next, with a curse on his
lips and a smile in his eye. What was to be made of such a man as that?

It chanced that the soldier looked up and saw the questioning glance
which the young clerk threw upon him. He raised his flagon and drank to
him, with a merry flash of his white teeth.

�A toi, mon garcon,� he cried. �Hast surely never seen a man-at-arms,
that thou shouldst stare so?�

�I never have,� said Alleyne frankly, �though I have oft heard talk of
their deeds.�

�By my hilt!� cried the other, �if you were to cross the narrow sea you
would find them as thick as bees at a tee-hole. Couldst not shoot a
bolt down any street of Bordeaux, I warrant, but you would pink archer,
squire, or knight. There are more breastplates than gaberdines to be
seen, I promise you.�

�And where got you all these pretty things?� asked Hordle John, pointing
at the heap in the corner.

�Where there is as much more waiting for any brave lad to pick it up.
Where a good man can always earn a good wage, and where he need look
upon no man as his paymaster, but just reach his hand out and help
himself. Aye, it is a goodly and a proper life. And here I drink to
mine old comrades, and the saints be with them! Arouse all together,
mes enfants, under pain of my displeasure. To Sir Claude Latour and the
White Company!�

�Sir Claude Latour and the White Company!� shouted the travellers,
draining off their goblets.

�Well quaffed, mes braves! It is for me to fill your cups again, since
you have drained them to my dear lads of the white jerkin. Hola! mon
ange, bring wine and ale. How runs the old stave?--

        We'll drink all together
        To the gray goose feather
        And the land where the gray goose flew.�

He roared out the catch in a harsh, unmusical voice, and ended with a
shout of laughter. �I trust that I am a better bowman than a minstrel,�
 said he.

�Methinks I have some remembrance of the lilt,� remarked the gleeman,
running his fingers over the strings. �Hoping that it will give thee no
offence, most holy sir�--with a vicious snap at Alleyne--�and with the
kind permit of the company, I will even venture upon it.�

Many a time in the after days Alleyne Edricson seemed to see that scene,
for all that so many which were stranger and more stirring were soon
to crowd upon him. The fat, red-faced gleeman, the listening group, the
archer with upraised finger beating in time to the music, and the huge
sprawling figure of Hordle John, all thrown into red light and black
shadow by the flickering fire in the centre--memory was to come often
lovingly back to it. At the time he was lost in admiration at the deft
way in which the jongleur disguised the loss of his two missing strings,
and the lusty, hearty fashion in which he trolled out his little ballad
of the outland bowmen, which ran in some such fashion as this:

          What of the bow?
            The bow was made in England:
        Of true wood, of yew wood,
          The wood of English bows;
            So men who are free
            Love the old yew tree
        And the land where the yew tree grows.

          What of the cord?
            The cord was made in England:
        A rough cord, a tough cord,
          A cord that bowmen love;
            So we'll drain our jacks
            To the English flax
        And the land where the hemp was wove.

          What of the shaft?
            The shaft was cut in England:
        A long shaft, a strong shaft,
          Barbed and trim and true;
            So we'll drink all together
            To the gray goose feather
        And the land where the gray goose flew.

          What of the men?
            The men were bred in England:
        The bowman--the yeoman--
          The lads of dale and fell
            Here's to you--and to you;
            To the hearts that are true
        And the land where the true hearts dwell.

�Well sung, by my hilt!� shouted the archer in high delight. �Many a
night have I heard that song, both in the old war-time and after in the
days of the White Company, when Black Simon of Norwich would lead the
stave, and four hundred of the best bowmen that ever drew string would
come roaring in upon the chorus. I have seen old John Hawkwood, the same
who has led half the Company into Italy, stand laughing in his beard as
he heard it, until his plates rattled again. But to get the full smack
of it ye must yourselves be English bowmen, and be far off upon an
outland soil.�

Whilst the song had been singing Dame Eliza and the maid had placed a
board across two trestles, and had laid upon it the knife, the spoon,
the salt, the tranchoir of bread, and finally the smoking dish which
held the savory supper. The archer settled himself to it like one who
had known what it was to find good food scarce; but his tongue still
went as merrily as his teeth.

�It passes me,� he cried, �how all you lusty fellows can bide scratching
your backs at home when there are such doings over the seas. Look at
me--what have I to do? It is but the eye to the cord, the cord to the
shaft, and the shaft to the mark. There is the whole song of it. It is
but what you do yourselves for pleasure upon a Sunday evening at the
parish village butts.�

�And the wage?� asked a laborer.

�You see what the wage brings,� he answered. �I eat of the best, and I
drink deep. I treat my friend, and I ask no friend to treat me. I clap
a silk gown on my girl's back. Never a knight's lady shall be better
betrimmed and betrinketed. How of all that, mon garcon? And how of the
heap of trifles that you can see for yourselves in yonder corner? They
are from the South French, every one, upon whom I have been making
war. By my hilt! camarades, I think that I may let my plunder speak for
itself.�

�It seems indeed to be a goodly service,� said the tooth-drawer.

�Tete bleu! yes, indeed. Then there is the chance of a ransom. Why, look
you, in the affair at Brignais some four years back, when the companies
slew James of Bourbon, and put his army to the sword, there was scarce a
man of ours who had not count, baron, or knight. Peter Karsdale, who
was but a common country lout newly brought over, with the English fleas
still hopping under his doublet, laid his great hands upon the Sieur
Amaury de Chatonville, who owns half Picardy, and had five thousand
crowns out of him, with his horse and harness. 'Tis true that a French
wench took it all off Peter as quick as the Frenchman paid it; but what
then? By the twang of string! it would be a bad thing if money was not
made to be spent; and how better than on woman--eh, ma belle?�

�It would indeed be a bad thing if we had not our brave archers to bring
wealth and kindly customs into the country,� quoth Dame Eliza, on whom
the soldier's free and open ways had made a deep impression.

�A toi, ma cherie!� said he, with his hand over his heart. �Hola! there
is la petite peeping from behind the door. A toi, aussi, ma petite! Mon
Dieu! but the lass has a good color!�

�There is one thing, fair sir,� said the Cambridge student in his
piping voice, �which I would fain that you would make more clear. As
I understand it, there was peace made at the town of Bretigny some six
years back between our most gracious monarch and the King of the French.
This being so, it seems most passing strange that you should talk so
loudly of war and of companies when there is no quarrel between the
French and us.�

�Meaning that I lie,� said the archer, laying down his knife.

�May heaven forfend!� cried the student hastily. �_Magna est veritas sed
rara_, which means in the Latin tongue that archers are all honorable
men. I come to you seeking knowledge, for it is my trade to learn.�

�I fear that you are yet a 'prentice to that trade,� quoth the soldier;
�for there is no child over the water but could answer what you ask.
Know then that though there may be peace between our own provinces and
the French, yet within the marches of France there is always war, for
the country is much divided against itself, and is furthermore harried
by bands of flayers, skinners, Brabacons, tardvenus, and the rest of
them. When every man's grip is on his neighbor's throat, and every
five-sous-piece of a baron is marching with tuck of drum to fight whom
he will, it would be a strange thing if five hundred brave English boys
could not pick up a living. Now that Sir John Hawkwood hath gone with
the East Anglian lads and the Nottingham woodmen into the service of the
Marquis of Montferrat to fight against the Lord of Milan, there are but
ten score of us left, yet I trust that I may be able to bring some back
with me to fill the ranks of the White Company. By the tooth of Peter!
it would be a bad thing if I could not muster many a Hamptonshire man
who would be ready to strike in under the red flag of St. George, and
the more so if Sir Nigel Loring, of Christchurch, should don hauberk
once more and take the lead of us.�

�Ah, you would indeed be in luck then,� quoth a woodman; �for it is said
that, setting aside the prince, and mayhap good old Sir John Chandos,
there was not in the whole army a man of such tried courage.�

�It is sooth, every word of it,� the archer answered. �I have seen him
with these two eyes in a stricken field, and never did man carry himself
better. Mon Dieu! yes, ye would not credit it to look at him, or to
hearken to his soft voice, but from the sailing from Orwell down to
the foray to Paris, and that is clear twenty years, there was not a
skirmish, onfall, sally, bushment, escalado or battle, but Sir Nigel was
in the heart of it. I go now to Christchurch with a letter to him from
Sir Claude Latour to ask him if he will take the place of Sir John
Hawkwood; and there is the more chance that he will if I bring one or
two likely men at my heels. What say you, woodman: wilt leave the bucks
to loose a shaft at a nobler mark?�

The forester shook his head. �I have wife and child at Emery Down,�
 quoth he; �I would not leave them for such a venture.�

�You, then, young sir?� asked the archer.

�Nay, I am a man of peace,� said Alleyne Edricson. �Besides, I have
other work to do.�

�Peste!� growled the soldier, striking his flagon on the board until the
dishes danced again. �What, in the name of the devil, hath come over
the folk? Why sit ye all moping by the fireside, like crows round a dead
horse, when there is man's work to be done within a few short leagues of
ye? Out upon you all, as a set of laggards and hang-backs! By my hilt I
believe that the men of England are all in France already, and that what
is left behind are in sooth the women dressed up in their paltocks and
hosen.�

�Archer,� quoth Hordle John, �you have lied more than once and more than
twice; for which, and also because I see much in you to dislike, I am
sorely tempted to lay you upon your back.�

�By my hilt! then, I have found a man at last!� shouted the bowman.
�And, 'fore God, you are a better man than I take you for if you can lay
me on my back, mon garcon. I have won the ram more times than there are
toes to my feet, and for seven long years I have found no man in the
Company who could make my jerkin dusty.�

�We have had enough bobance and boasting,� said Hordle John, rising and
throwing off his doublet. �I will show you that there are better men
left in England than ever went thieving to France.�

�Pasques Dieu!� cried the archer, loosening his jerkin, and eyeing his
foeman over with the keen glance of one who is a judge of manhood.
�I have only once before seen such a body of a man. By your leave, my
red-headed friend, I should be right sorry to exchange buffets with
you; and I will allow that there is no man in the Company who would
pull against you on a rope; so let that be a salve to your pride. On
the other hand I should judge that you have led a life of ease for some
months back, and that my muscle is harder than your own. I am ready to
wager upon myself against you if you are not afeard.�

�Afeard, thou lurden!� growled big John. �I never saw the face yet of
the man that I was afeard of. Come out, and we shall see who is the
better man.�

�But the wager?�

�I have nought to wager. Come out for the love and the lust of the
thing.�

�Nought to wager!� cried the soldier. �Why, you have that which I covet
above all things. It is that big body of thine that I am after. See,
now, mon garcon. I have a French feather-bed there, which I have been at
pains to keep these years back. I had it at the sacking of Issodun, and
the King himself hath not such a bed. If you throw me, it is thine; but,
if I throw you, then you are under a vow to take bow and bill and hie
with me to France, there to serve in the White Company as long as we be
enrolled.�

�A fair wager!� cried all the travellers, moving back their benches and
trestles, so as to give fair field for the wrestlers.

�Then you may bid farewell to your bed, soldier,� said Hordle John.

�Nay; I shall keep the bed, and I shall have you to France in spite
of your teeth, and you shall live to thank me for it. How shall it be,
then, mon enfant? Collar and elbow, or close-lock, or catch how you
can?�

�To the devil with your tricks,� said John, opening and shutting his
great red hands. �Stand forth, and let me clip thee.�

�Shalt clip me as best you can then,� quoth the archer, moving out into
the open space, and keeping a most wary eye upon his opponent. He had
thrown off his green jerkin, and his chest was covered only by a pink
silk jupon, or undershirt, cut low in the neck and sleeveless. Hordle
John was stripped from his waist upwards, and his huge body, with his
great muscles swelling out like the gnarled roots of an oak, towered
high above the soldier. The other, however, though near a foot shorter,
was a man of great strength; and there was a gloss upon his white skin
which was wanting in the heavier limbs of the renegade monk. He was
quick on his feet, too, and skilled at the game; so that it was clear,
from the poise of head and shine of eye, that he counted the chances to
be in his favor. It would have been hard that night, through the whole
length of England, to set up a finer pair in face of each other.

Big John stood waiting in the centre with a sullen, menacing eye, and
his red hair in a bristle, while the archer paced lightly and swiftly to
the right and the left with crooked knee and hands advanced. Then with a
sudden dash, so swift and fierce that the eye could scarce follow it, he
flew in upon his man and locked his leg round him. It was a grip that,
between men of equal strength, would mean a fall; but Hordle John tore
him off from him as he might a rat, and hurled him across the room, so
that his head cracked up against the wooden wall.

�Ma foi!� cried the bowman, passing his fingers through his curls, �you
were not far from the feather-bed then, mon gar. A little more and this
good hostel would have a new window.�

Nothing daunted, he approached his man once more, but this time with
more caution than before. With a quick feint he threw the other off his
guard, and then, bounding upon him, threw his legs round his waist and
his arms round his bull-neck, in the hope of bearing him to the ground
with the sudden shock. With a bellow of rage, Hordle John squeezed him
limp in his huge arms; and then, picking him up, cast him down upon the
floor with a force which might well have splintered a bone or two,
had not the archer with the most perfect coolness clung to the other's
forearms to break his fall. As it was, he dropped upon his feet and
kept his balance, though it sent a jar through his frame which set every
joint a-creaking. He bounded back from his perilous foeman; but the
other, heated by the bout, rushed madly after him, and so gave the
practised wrestler the very vantage for which he had planned. As big
John flung himself upon him, the archer ducked under the great red hands
that clutched for him, and, catching his man round the thighs, hurled
him over his shoulder--helped as much by his own mad rush as by the
trained strength of the heave. To Alleyne's eye, it was as if John had
taken unto himself wings and flown. As he hurtled through the air, with
giant limbs revolving, the lad's heart was in his mouth; for surely no
man ever yet had such a fall and came scathless out of it. In truth,
hardy as the man was, his neck had been assuredly broken had he not
pitched head first on the very midriff of the drunken artist, who was
slumbering so peacefully in the corner, all unaware of these stirring
doings. The luckless limner, thus suddenly brought out from his dreams,
sat up with a piercing yell, while Hordle John bounded back into the
circle almost as rapidly as he had left it.

�One more fall, by all the saints!� he cried, throwing out his arms.

�Not I,� quoth the archer, pulling on his clothes, �I have come well out
of the business. I would sooner wrestle with the great bear of Navarre.�

�It was a trick,� cried John.

�Aye was it. By my ten finger-bones! it is a trick that will add a
proper man to the ranks of the Company.�

�Oh, for that,� said the other, �I count it not a fly; for I had
promised myself a good hour ago that I should go with thee, since the
life seems to be a goodly and proper one. Yet I would fain have had the
feather-bed.�

�I doubt it not, mon ami,� quoth the archer, going back to his tankard.
�Here is to thee, lad, and may we be good comrades to each other! But,
hola! what is it that ails our friend of the wrathful face?�

The unfortunate limner had been sitting up rubbing himself ruefully
and staring about with a vacant gaze, which showed that he knew neither
where he was nor what had occurred to him. Suddenly, however, a flash
of intelligence had come over his sodden features, and he rose and
staggered for the door. �'Ware the ale!� he said in a hoarse whisper,
shaking a warning finger at the company. �Oh, holy Virgin, 'ware the
ale!� and slapping his hands to his injury, he flitted off into the
darkness, amid a shout of laughter, in which the vanquished joined as
merrily as the victor. The remaining forester and the two laborers
were also ready for the road, and the rest of the company turned to the
blankets which Dame Eliza and the maid had laid out for them upon the
floor. Alleyne, weary with the unwonted excitements of the day, was soon
in a deep slumber broken only by fleeting visions of twittering legs,
cursing beggars, black robbers, and the many strange folk whom he had
met at the �Pied Merlin.�



CHAPTER VII. HOW THE THREE COMRADES JOURNEYED THROUGH THE WOODLANDS.


At early dawn the country inn was all alive, for it was rare indeed
that an hour of daylight would be wasted at a time when lighting was so
scarce and dear. Indeed, early as it was when Dame Eliza began to stir,
it seemed that others could be earlier still, for the door was ajar,
and the learned student of Cambridge had taken himself off, with a
mind which was too intent upon the high things of antiquity to stoop
to consider the four-pence which he owed for bed and board. It was the
shrill out-cry of the landlady when she found her loss, and the clucking
of the hens, which had streamed in through the open door, that first
broke in upon the slumbers of the tired wayfarers.

Once afoot, it was not long before the company began to disperse. A
sleek mule with red trappings was brought round from some neighboring
shed for the physician, and he ambled away with much dignity upon his
road to Southampton. The tooth-drawer and the gleeman called for a cup
of small ale apiece, and started off together for Ringwood fair, the old
jongleur looking very yellow in the eye and swollen in the face after
his overnight potations. The archer, however, who had drunk more than
any man in the room, was as merry as a grig, and having kissed the
matron and chased the maid up the ladder once more, he went out to the
brook, and came back with the water dripping from his face and hair.

�Hola! my man of peace,� he cried to Alleyne, �whither are you bent this
morning?�

�To Minstead,� quoth he. �My brother Simon Edricson is socman there, and
I go to bide with him for a while. I prythee, let me have my score, good
dame.�

�Score, indeed!� cried she, standing with upraised hands in front of the
panel on which Alleyne had worked the night before. �Say, rather what
it is that I owe to thee, good youth. Aye, this is indeed a pied merlin,
and with a leveret under its claws, as I am a living woman. By the rood
of Waltham! but thy touch is deft and dainty.�

�And see the red eye of it!� cried the maid.

�Aye, and the open beak.�

�And the ruffled wing,� added Hordle John.

�By my hilt!� cried the archer, �it is the very bird itself.�

The young clerk flushed with pleasure at this chorus of praise, rude and
indiscriminate indeed, and yet so much heartier and less grudging than
any which he had ever heard from the critical brother Jerome, or the
short-spoken Abbot. There was, it would seem, great kindness as well as
great wickedness in this world, of which he had heard so little that was
good. His hostess would hear nothing of his paying either for bed or
for board, while the archer and Hordle John placed a hand upon either
shoulder and led him off to the board, where some smoking fish, a dish
of spinach, and a jug of milk were laid out for their breakfast.

�I should not be surprised to learn, mon camarade,� said the soldier, as
he heaped a slice of fish upon Alleyne's tranchoir of bread, �that you
could read written things, since you are so ready with your brushes and
pigments.�

�It would be shame to the good brothers of Beaulieu if I could not,� he
answered, �seeing that I have been their clerk this ten years back.�

The bowman looked at him with great respect. �Think of that!� said he.
�And you with not a hair to your face, and a skin like a girl. I can
shoot three hundred and fifty paces with my little popper there, and
four hundred and twenty with the great war-bow; yet I can make nothing
of this, nor read my own name if you were to set 'Sam Aylward' up
against me. In the whole Company there was only one man who could read,
and he fell down a well at the taking of Ventadour, which proves that
the thing is not suited to a soldier, though most needful to a clerk.�

�I can make some show at it,� said big John; �though I was scarce long
enough among the monks to catch the whole trick of it.

�Here, then, is something to try upon,� quoth the archer, pulling a
square of parchment from the inside of his tunic. It was tied securely
with a broad band of purple silk, and firmly sealed at either end with a
large red seal. John pored long and earnestly over the inscription upon
the back, with his brows bent as one who bears up against great mental
strain.

�Not having read much of late,� he said, �I am loth to say too much
about what this may be. Some might say one thing and some another, just
as one bowman loves the yew, and a second will not shoot save with the
ash. To me, by the length and the look of it, I should judge this to be
a verse from one of the Psalms.�

The bowman shook his head. �It is scarce likely,� he said, �that Sir
Claude Latour should send me all the way across seas with nought more
weighty than a psalm-verse. You have clean overshot the butts this time,
mon camarade. Give it to the little one. I will wager my feather-bed
that he makes more sense of it.�

�Why, it is written in the French tongue,� said Alleyne, �and in a
right clerkly hand. This is how it runs: 'A le moult puissant et moult
honorable chevalier, Sir Nigel Loring de Christchurch, de son tres
fidele ami Sir Claude Latour, capitaine de la Compagnie blanche,
chatelain de Biscar, grand seigneur de Montchateau, vavaseur de le
renomme Gaston, Comte de Foix, tenant les droits de la haute justice, de
la milieu, et de la basse.' Which signifies in our speech: 'To the very
powerful and very honorable knight, Sir Nigel Loring of Christchurch,
from his very faithful friend Sir Claude Latour, captain of the White
Company, chatelain of Biscar, grand lord of Montchateau and vassal to
the renowned Gaston, Count of Foix, who holds the rights of the high
justice, the middle and the low.'�

�Look at that now!� cried the bowman in triumph. �That is just what he
would have said.�

�I can see now that it is even so,� said John, examining the parchment
again. �Though I scarce understand this high, middle and low.�

�By my hilt! you would understand it if you were Jacques Bonhomme. The
low justice means that you may fleece him, and the middle that you may
torture him, and the high that you may slay him. That is about the truth
of it. But this is the letter which I am to take; and since the platter
is clean it is time that we trussed up and were afoot. You come with
me, mon gros Jean; and as to you, little one, where did you say that you
journeyed?�

�To Minstead.�

�Ah, yes. I know this forest country well, though I was born myself
in the Hundred of Easebourne, in the Rape of Chichester, hard by the
village of Midhurst. Yet I have not a word to say against the Hampton
men, for there are no better comrades or truer archers in the whole
Company than some who learned to loose the string in these very parts.
We shall travel round with you to Minstead lad, seeing that it is little
out of our way.�

�I am ready,� said Alleyne, right pleased at the thought of such company
upon the road.

�So am not I. I must store my plunder at this inn, since the hostess is
an honest woman. Hola! ma cherie, I wish to leave with you my gold-work,
my velvet, my silk, my feather bed, my incense-boat, my ewer, my naping
linen, and all the rest of it. I take only the money in a linen bag,
and the box of rose colored sugar which is a gift from my captain to the
Lady Loring. Wilt guard my treasure for me?�

�It shall be put in the safest loft, good archer. Come when you may, you
shall find it ready for you.�

�Now, there is a true friend!� cried the bowman, taking her hand. �There
is a bonne amie! English land and English women, say I, and French wine
and French plunder. I shall be back anon, mon ange. I am a lonely man,
my sweeting, and I must settle some day when the wars are over and done.
Mayhap you and I----Ah, mechante, mechante! There is la petite peeping
from behind the door. Now, John, the sun is over the trees; you must be
brisker than this when the bugleman blows 'Bows and Bills.'�

�I have been waiting this time back,� said Hordle John gruffly.

�Then we must be off. Adieu, ma vie! The two livres shall settle the
score and buy some ribbons against the next kermesse. Do not forget Sam
Aylward, for his heart shall ever be thine alone--and thine, ma petite!
So, marchons, and may St. Julian grant us as good quarters elsewhere!�

The sun had risen over Ashurst and Denny woods, and was shining
brightly, though the eastern wind had a sharp flavor to it, and the
leaves were flickering thickly from the trees. In the High Street of
Lyndhurst the wayfarers had to pick their way, for the little town
was crowded with the guardsmen, grooms, and yeomen prickers who were
attached to the King's hunt. The King himself was staying at Castle
Malwood, but several of his suite had been compelled to seek such
quarters as they might find in the wooden or wattle-and-daub cottages of
the village. Here and there a small escutcheon, peeping from a
glassless window, marked the night's lodging of knight or baron. These
coats-of-arms could be read, where a scroll would be meaningless, and
the bowman, like most men of his age, was well versed in the common
symbols of heraldry.

�There is the Saracen's head of Sir Bernard Brocas,� quoth he. �I saw
him last at the ruffle at Poictiers some ten years back, when he bore
himself like a man. He is the master of the King's horse, and can sing
a right jovial stave, though in that he cannot come nigh to Sir John
Chandos, who is first at the board or in the saddle. Three martlets on a
field azure, that must be one of the Luttrells. By the crescent upon it,
it should be the second son of old Sir Hugh, who had a bolt through his
ankle at the intaking of Romorantin, he having rushed into the fray ere
his squire had time to clasp his solleret to his greave. There too is
the hackle which is the old device of the De Brays. I have served under
Sir Thomas de Bray, who was as jolly as a pie, and a lusty swordsman
until he got too fat for his harness.�

So the archer gossiped as the three wayfarers threaded their way among
the stamping horses, the busy grooms, and the knots of pages and squires
who disputed over the merits of their masters' horses and deer-hounds.
As they passed the old church, which stood upon a mound at the left-hand
side of the village street the door was flung open, and a stream of
worshippers wound down the sloping path, coming from the morning mass,
all chattering like a cloud of jays. Alleyne bent knee and doffed hat at
the sight of the open door; but ere he had finished an ave his comrades
were out of sight round the curve of the path, and he had to run to
overtake them.

�What!� he said, �not one word of prayer before God's own open house?
How can ye hope for His blessing upon the day?�

�My friend,� said Hordle John, �I have prayed so much during the last
two months, not only during the day, but at matins, lauds, and the like,
when I could scarce keep my head upon my shoulders for nodding, that I
feel that I have somewhat over-prayed myself.�

�How can a man have too much religion?� cried Alleyne earnestly. �It is
the one thing that availeth. A man is but a beast as he lives from day
to day, eating and drinking, breathing and sleeping. It is only when
he raises himself, and concerns himself with the immortal spirit within
him, that he becomes in very truth a man. Bethink ye how sad a thing
it would be that the blood of the Redeemer should be spilled to no
purpose.�

�Bless the lad, if he doth not blush like any girl, and yet preach like
the whole College of Cardinals,� cried the archer.

�In truth I blush that any one so weak and so unworthy as I should
try to teach another that which he finds it so passing hard to follow
himself.�

�Prettily said, mon garcon. Touching that same slaying of the Redeemer,
it was a bad business. A good padre in France read to us from a scroll
the whole truth of the matter. The soldiers came upon him in the garden.
In truth, these Apostles of His may have been holy men, but they were of
no great account as men-at-arms. There was one, indeed, Sir Peter, who
smote out like a true man; but, unless he is belied, he did but clip
a varlet's ear, which was no very knightly deed. By these ten
finger-bones! had I been there with Black Simon of Norwich, and but one
score picked men of the Company, we had held them in play. Could we do
no more, we had at least filled the false knight, Sir Judas, so full of
English arrows that he would curse the day that ever he came on such an
errand.�

The young clerk smiled at his companion's earnestness. �Had He wished
help,� he said, �He could have summoned legions of archangels from
heaven, so what need had He of your poor bow and arrow? Besides, bethink
you of His own words--that those who live by the sword shall perish by
the sword.�

�And how could man die better?� asked the archer. �If I had my wish, it
would be to fall so--not, mark you, in any mere skirmish of the Company,
but in a stricken field, with the great lion banner waving over us and
the red oriflamme in front, amid the shouting of my fellows and the
twanging of the strings. But let it be sword, lance, or bolt that
strikes me down: for I should think it shame to die from an iron ball
from the fire-crake or bombard or any such unsoldierly weapon, which is
only fitted to scare babes with its foolish noise and smoke.�

�I have heard much even in the quiet cloisters of these new and dreadful
engines,� quoth Alleyne. �It is said, though I can scarce bring myself
to believe it, that they will send a ball twice as far as a bowman
can shoot his shaft, and with such force as to break through armor of
proof.�

�True enough, my lad. But while the armorer is thrusting in his
devil's-dust, and dropping his ball, and lighting his flambeau, I
can very easily loose six shafts, or eight maybe, so he hath no great
vantage after all. Yet I will not deny that at the intaking of a town
it is well to have good store of bombards. I am told that at Calais they
made dints in the wall that a man might put his head into. But surely,
comrades, some one who is grievously hurt hath passed along this road
before us.�

All along the woodland track there did indeed run a scattered straggling
trail of blood-marks, sometimes in single drops, and in other places in
broad, ruddy gouts, smudged over the dead leaves or crimsoning the white
flint stones.

�It must be a stricken deer,� said John.

�Nay, I am woodman enough to see that no deer hath passed this way this
morning; and yet the blood is fresh. But hark to the sound!�

They stood listening all three with sidelong heads. Through the silence
of the great forest there came a swishing, whistling sound, mingled
with the most dolorous groans, and the voice of a man raised in a
high quavering kind of song. The comrades hurried onwards eagerly, and
topping the brow of a small rising they saw upon the other side the
source from which these strange noises arose.

A tall man, much stooped in the shoulders, was walking slowly with
bended head and clasped hands in the centre of the path. He was dressed
from head to foot in a long white linen cloth, and a high white cap
with a red cross printed upon it. His gown was turned back from his
shoulders, and the flesh there was a sight to make a man wince, for it
was all beaten to a pulp, and the blood was soaking into his gown and
trickling down upon the ground. Behind him walked a smaller man with his
hair touched with gray, who was clad in the same white garb. He intoned
a long whining rhyme in the French tongue, and at the end of every line
he raised a thick cord, all jagged with pellets of lead, and smote his
companion across the shoulders until the blood spurted again. Even as
the three wayfarers stared, however, there was a sudden change, for the
smaller man, having finished his song, loosened his own gown and handed
the scourge to the other, who took up the stave once more and lashed
his companion with all the strength of his bare and sinewy arm. So,
alternately beating and beaten, they made their dolorous way through the
beautiful woods and under the amber arches of the fading beech-trees,
where the calm strength and majesty of Nature might serve to rebuke the
foolish energies and misspent strivings of mankind.

Such a spectacle was new to Hordle John or to Alleyne Edricson; but the
archer treated it lightly, as a common matter enough.

�These are the Beating Friars, otherwise called the Flagellants,� quoth
he. �I marvel that ye should have come upon none of them before, for
across the water they are as common as gallybaggers. I have heard that
there are no English among them, but that they are from France, Italy
and Bohemia. En avant, camarades! that we may have speech with them.�

As they came up to them, Alleyne could hear the doleful dirge which the
beater was chanting, bringing down his heavy whip at the end of each
line, while the groans of the sufferer formed a sort of dismal chorus.
It was in old French, and ran somewhat in this way:

        Or avant, entre nous tous freres
        Battons nos charognes bien fort
        En remembrant la grant misere
        De Dieu et sa piteuse mort
        Qui fut pris en la gent amere
        Et vendus et trais a tort
        Et bastu sa chair, vierge et dere
        Au nom de ce battons plus fort.

Then at the end of the verse the scourge changed hands and the chanting
began anew.

�Truly, holy fathers,� said the archer in French as they came abreast of
them, �you have beaten enough for to-day. The road is all spotted like a
shambles at Martinmas. Why should ye mishandle yourselves thus?�

�C'est pour vos peches--pour vos peches,� they droned, looking at the
travellers with sad lack-lustre eyes, and then bent to their bloody
work once more without heed to the prayers and persuasions which were
addressed to them. Finding all remonstrance useless, the three comrades
hastened on their way, leaving these strange travellers to their dreary
task.

�Mort Dieu!� cried the bowman, �there is a bucketful or more of my blood
over in France, but it was all spilled in hot fight, and I should think
twice before I drew it drop by drop as these friars are doing. By my
hilt! our young one here is as white as a Picardy cheese. What is amiss
then, mon cher?�

�It is nothing,� Alleyne answered. �My life has been too quiet, I am not
used to such sights.�

�Ma foi!� the other cried, �I have never yet seen a man who was so stout
of speech and yet so weak of heart.�

�Not so, friend,� quoth big John; �it is not weakness of heart for I
know the lad well. His heart is as good as thine or mine but he hath
more in his pate than ever you will carry under that tin pot of thine,
and as a consequence he can see farther into things, so that they weigh
upon him more.�

�Surely to any man it is a sad sight,� said Alleyne, �to see these
holy men, who have done no sin themselves, suffering so for the sins of
others. Saints are they, if in this age any may merit so high a name.�

�I count them not a fly,� cried Hordle John; �for who is the better for
all their whipping and yowling? They are like other friars, I trow, when
all is done. Let them leave their backs alone, and beat the pride out of
their hearts.�

�By the three kings! there is sooth in what you say,� remarked the
archer. �Besides, methinks if I were le bon Dieu, it would bring me
little joy to see a poor devil cutting the flesh off his bones; and I
should think that he had but a small opinion of me, that he should hope
to please me by such provost-marshal work. No, by my hilt! I should look
with a more loving eye upon a jolly archer who never harmed a fallen foe
and never feared a hale one.�

�Doubtless you mean no sin,� said Alleyne. �If your words are wild, it
is not for me to judge them. Can you not see that there are other foes
in this world besides Frenchmen, and as much glory to be gained in
conquering them? Would it not be a proud day for knight or squire if he
could overthrow seven adversaries in the lists? Yet here are we in the
lists of life, and there come the seven black champions against us Sir
Pride, Sir Covetousness, Sir Lust, Sir Anger, Sir Gluttony, Sir Envy,
and Sir Sloth. Let a man lay those seven low, and he shall have the
prize of the day, from the hands of the fairest queen of beauty, even
from the Virgin-Mother herself. It is for this that these men mortify
their flesh, and to set us an example, who would pamper ourselves
overmuch. I say again that they are God's own saints, and I bow my head
to them.�

�And so you shall, mon petit,� replied the archer. �I have not heard
a man speak better since old Dom Bertrand died, who was at one time
chaplain to the White Company. He was a very valiant man, but at
the battle of Brignais he was spitted through the body by a Hainault
man-at-arms. For this we had an excommunication read against the man,
when next we saw our holy father at Avignon; but as we had not his name,
and knew nothing of him, save that he rode a dapple-gray roussin, I have
feared sometimes that the blight may have settled upon the wrong man.�

�Your Company has been, then, to bow knee before our holy father, the
Pope Urban, the prop and centre of Christendom?� asked Alleyne, much
interested. �Perchance you have yourself set eyes upon his august face?�

�Twice I saw him,� said the archer. �He was a lean little rat of a man,
with a scab on his chin. The first time we had five thousand crowns out
of him, though he made much ado about it. The second time we asked ten
thousand, but it was three days before we could come to terms, and I
am of opinion myself that we might have done better by plundering the
palace. His chamberlain and cardinals came forth, as I remember, to
ask whether we would take seven thousand crowns with his blessing and
a plenary absolution, or the ten thousand with his solemn ban by bell,
book and candle. We were all of one mind that it was best to have the
ten thousand with the curse; but in some way they prevailed upon Sir
John, so that we were blest and shriven against our will. Perchance it
is as well, for the Company were in need of it about that time.�

The pious Alleyne was deeply shocked by this reminiscence. Involuntarily
he glanced up and around to see if there were any trace of those
opportune levin-flashes and thunderbolts which, in the �Acta Sanctorum,�
 were wont so often to cut short the loose talk of the scoffer. The
autumn sun streamed down as brightly as ever, and the peaceful red path
still wound in front of them through the rustling, yellow-tinted forest,
Nature seemed to be too busy with her own concerns to heed the dignity
of an outraged pontiff. Yet he felt a sense of weight and reproach
within his breast, as though he had sinned himself in giving ear to such
words. The teachings of twenty years cried out against such license. It
was not until he had thrown himself down before one of the many wayside
crosses, and had prayed from his heart both for the archer and for
himself, that the dark cloud rolled back again from his spirit.



CHAPTER VIII. THE THREE FRIENDS.


His companions had passed on whilst he was at his orisons; but his young
blood and the fresh morning air both invited him to a scamper. His staff
in one hand and his scrip in the other, with springy step and floating
locks, he raced along the forest path, as active and as graceful as a
young deer. He had not far to go, however; for, on turning a corner,
he came on a roadside cottage with a wooden fence-work around it, where
stood big John and Aylward the bowman, staring at something within. As
he came up with them, he saw that two little lads, the one about nine
years of age and the other somewhat older, were standing on the plot
in front of the cottage, each holding out a round stick in their left
hands, with their arms stiff and straight from the shoulder, as
silent and still as two small statues. They were pretty, blue-eyed,
yellow-haired lads, well made and sturdy, with bronzed skins, which
spoke of a woodland life.

�Here are young chips from an old bow stave!� cried the soldier in great
delight. �This is the proper way to raise children. By my hilt! I could
not have trained them better had I the ordering of it myself.�

�What is it then?� asked Hordle John. �They stand very stiff, and I
trust that they have not been struck so.�

�Nay, they are training their left arms, that they may have a steady
grasp of the bow. So my own father trained me, and six days a week I
held out his walking-staff till my arm was heavy as lead. Hola, mes
enfants! how long will you hold out?�

�Until the sun is over the great lime-tree, good master,� the elder
answered.

�What would ye be, then? Woodmen? Verderers?�

�Nay, soldiers,� they cried both together.

�By the beard of my father! but ye are whelps of the true breed. Why so
keen, then, to be soldiers?�

�That we may fight the Scots,� they answered. �Daddy will send us to
fight the Scots.�

�And why the Scots, my pretty lads? We have seen French and Spanish
galleys no further away than Southampton, but I doubt that it will be
some time before the Scots find their way to these parts.�

�Our business is with the Scots,� quoth the elder; �for it was the Scots
who cut off daddy's string fingers and his thumbs.�

�Aye, lads, it was that,� said a deep voice from behind Alleyne's
shoulder. Looking round, the wayfarers saw a gaunt, big-boned man, with
sunken cheeks and a sallow face, who had come up behind them. He held
up his two hands as he spoke, and showed that the thumbs and two first
fingers had been torn away from each of them.

�Ma foi, camarade!� cried Aylward. �Who hath served thee in so shameful
a fashion?�

�It is easy to see, friend, that you were born far from the marches of
Scotland,� quoth the stranger, with a bitter smile. �North of Humber
there is no man who would not know the handiwork of Devil Douglas, the
black Lord James.�

�And how fell you into his hands?� asked John.

�I am a man of the north country, from the town of Beverley and the
wapentake of Holderness,� he answered. �There was a day when, from Trent
to Tweed, there was no better marksman than Robin Heathcot. Yet, as you
see, he hath left me, as he hath left many another poor border archer,
with no grip for bill or bow. Yet the king hath given me a living here
in the southlands, and please God these two lads of mine will pay off
a debt that hath been owing over long. What is the price of daddy's
thumbs, boys?�

�Twenty Scottish lives,� they answered together.

�And for the fingers?�

�Half a score.�

�When they can bend my war-bow, and bring down a squirrel at a hundred
paces, I send them to take service under Johnny Copeland, the Lord of
the Marches and Governor of Carlisle. By my soul! I would give the rest
of my fingers to see the Douglas within arrow-flight of them.�

�May you live to see it,� quoth the bowman. �And hark ye, mes enfants,
take an old soldier's rede and lay your bodies to the bow, drawing from
hip and thigh as much as from arm. Learn also, I pray you, to shoot with
a dropping shaft; for though a bowman may at times be called upon to
shoot straight and fast, yet it is more often that he has to do with a
town-guard behind a wall, or an arbalestier with his mantlet raised when
you cannot hope to do him scathe unless your shaft fall straight upon
him from the clouds. I have not drawn string for two weeks, but I may
be able to show ye how such shots should be made.� He loosened his
long-bow, slung his quiver round to the front, and then glanced keenly
round for a fitting mark. There was a yellow and withered stump some
way off, seen under the drooping branches of a lofty oak. The archer
measured the distance with his eye; and then, drawing three shafts, he
shot them off with such speed that the first had not reached the mark
ere the last was on the string. Each arrow passed high over the oak;
and, of the three, two stuck fair into the stump; while the third,
caught in some wandering puff of wind, was driven a foot or two to one
side.

�Good!� cried the north countryman. �Hearken to him lads! He is a master
bowman. Your dad says amen to every word he says.�

�By my hilt!� said Aylward, �if I am to preach on bowmanship, the whole
long day would scarce give me time for my sermon. We have marksmen in
the Company who will notch with a shaft every crevice and joint of a
man-at-arm's harness, from the clasp of his bassinet to the hinge of his
greave. But, with your favor, friend, I must gather my arrows again, for
while a shaft costs a penny a poor man can scarce leave them sticking
in wayside stumps. We must, then, on our road again, and I hope from my
heart that you may train these two young goshawks here until they are
ready for a cast even at such a quarry as you speak of.�

Leaving the thumbless archer and his brood, the wayfarers struck through
the scattered huts of Emery Down, and out on to the broad rolling heath
covered deep in ferns and in heather, where droves of the half-wild
black forest pigs were rooting about amongst the hillocks. The woods
about this point fall away to the left and the right, while the road
curves upwards and the wind sweeps keenly over the swelling uplands. The
broad strips of bracken glowed red and yellow against the black peaty
soil, and a queenly doe who grazed among them turned her white front
and her great questioning eyes towards the wayfarers. Alleyne gazed
in admiration at the supple beauty of the creature; but the archer's
fingers played with his quiver, and his eyes glistened with the fell
instinct which urges a man to slaughter.

�Tete Dieu!� he growled, �were this France, or even Guienne, we should
have a fresh haunch for our none-meat. Law or no law, I have a mind to
loose a bolt at her.�

�I would break your stave across my knee first,� cried John, laying his
great hand upon the bow. �What! man, I am forest-born, and I know what
comes of it. In our own township of Hordle two have lost their eyes and
one his skin for this very thing. On my troth, I felt no great love when
I first saw you, but since then I have conceived over much regard for
you to wish to see the verderer's flayer at work upon you.�

�It is my trade to risk my skin,� growled the archer; but none the less
he thrust his quiver over his hip again and turned his face for the
west.

As they advanced, the path still tended upwards, running from heath into
copses of holly and yew, and so back into heath again. It was joyful to
hear the merry whistle of blackbirds as they darted from one clump
of greenery to the other. Now and again a peaty amber colored stream
rippled across their way, with ferny over-grown banks, where the blue
kingfisher flitted busily from side to side, or the gray and pensive
heron, swollen with trout and dignity, stood ankle-deep among the
sedges. Chattering jays and loud wood-pigeons flapped thickly overhead,
while ever and anon the measured tapping of Nature's carpenter, the
great green woodpecker, sounded from each wayside grove. On either side,
as the path mounted, the long sweep of country broadened and expanded,
sloping down on the one side through yellow forest and brown moor to
the distant smoke of Lymington and the blue misty channel which lay
alongside the sky-line, while to the north the woods rolled away, grove
topping grove, to where in the furthest distance the white spire of
Salisbury stood out hard and clear against the cloudless sky. To Alleyne
whose days had been spent in the low-lying coastland, the eager upland
air and the wide free country-side gave a sense of life and of the joy
of living which made his young blood tingle in his veins. Even the
heavy John was not unmoved by the beauty of their road, while the bowman
whistled lustily or sang snatches of French love songs in a voice which
might have scared the most stout-hearted maiden that ever hearkened to
serenade.

�I have a liking for that north countryman,� he remarked presently. �He
hath good power of hatred. Couldst see by his cheek and eye that he is
as bitter as verjuice. I warm to a man who hath some gall in his liver.�

�Ah me!� sighed Alleyne. �Would it not be better if he had some love in
his heart?�

�I would not say nay to that. By my hilt! I shall never be said to be
traitor to the little king. Let a man love the sex. Pasques Dieu! they
are made to be loved, les petites, from whimple down to shoe-string! I
am right glad, mon garcon, to see that the good monks have trained thee
so wisely and so well.�

�Nay, I meant not worldly love, but rather that his heart should soften
towards those who have wronged him.�

The archer shook his head. �A man should love those of his own breed,�
 said he. �But it is not nature that an English-born man should love
a Scot or a Frenchman. Ma foi! you have not seen a drove of Nithsdale
raiders on their Galloway nags, or you would not speak of loving them. I
would as soon take Beelzebub himself to my arms. I fear, mon gar., that
they have taught thee but badly at Beaulieu, for surely a bishop knows
more of what is right and what is ill than an abbot can do, and I myself
with these very eyes saw the Bishop of Lincoln hew into a Scottish
hobeler with a battle-axe, which was a passing strange way of showing
him that he loved him.�

Alleyne scarce saw his way to argue in the face of so decided an opinion
on the part of a high dignitary of the Church. �You have borne arms
against the Scots, then?� he asked.

�Why, man, I first loosed string in battle when I was but a lad, younger
by two years than you, at Neville's Cross, under the Lord Mowbray.
Later, I served under the Warden of Berwick, that very John Copeland of
whom our friend spake, the same who held the King of Scots to ransom. Ma
foi! it is rough soldiering, and a good school for one who would learn
to be hardy and war-wise.�

�I have heard that the Scots are good men of war,� said Hordle John.

�For axemen and for spearmen I have not seen their match,� the archer
answered. �They can travel, too, with bag of meal and gridiron slung
to their sword-belt, so that it is ill to follow them. There are scant
crops and few beeves in the borderland, where a man must reap his grain
with sickle in one fist and brown bill in the other. On the other hand,
they are the sorriest archers that I have ever seen, and cannot so much
as aim with the arbalest, to say nought of the long-bow. Again, they are
mostly poor folk, even the nobles among them, so that there are few who
can buy as good a brigandine of chain-mail as that which I am wearing,
and it is ill for them to stand up against our own knights, who carry
the price of five Scotch farms upon their chest and shoulders. Man for
man, with equal weapons, they are as worthy and valiant men as could be
found in the whole of Christendom.�

�And the French?� asked Alleyne, to whom the archer's light gossip had
all the relish that the words of the man of action have for the recluse.

�The French are also very worthy men. We have had great good fortune in
France, and it hath led to much bobance and camp-fire talk, but I have
ever noticed that those who know the most have the least to say about
it. I have seen Frenchmen fight both in open field, in the intaking and
the defending of towns or castlewicks, in escalados, camisades, night
forays, bushments, sallies, outfalls, and knightly spear-runnings. Their
knights and squires, lad, are every whit as good as ours, and I could
pick out a score of those who ride behind Du Guesclin who would hold the
lists with sharpened lances against the best men in the army of England.
On the other hand, their common folk are so crushed down with gabelle,
and poll-tax, and every manner of cursed tallage, that the spirit has
passed right out of them. It is a fool's plan to teach a man to be a
cur in peace, and think that he will be a lion in war. Fleece them like
sheep and sheep they will remain. If the nobles had not conquered
the poor folk it is like enough that we should not have conquered the
nobles.�

�But they must be sorry folk to bow down to the rich in such a fashion,�
 said big John. �I am but a poor commoner of England myself, and yet I
know something of charters, liberties, franchises, usages, privileges,
customs, and the like. If these be broken, then all men know that it is
time to buy arrow-heads.�

�Aye, but the men of the law are strong in France as well as the men
of war. By my hilt! I hold that a man has more to fear there from the
ink-pot of the one than from the iron of the other. There is ever some
cursed sheepskin in their strong boxes to prove that the rich man should
be richer and the poor man poorer. It would scarce pass in England, but
they are quiet folk over the water.�

�And what other nations have you seen in your travels, good sir?� asked
Alleyne Edricson. His young mind hungered for plain facts of life, after
the long course of speculation and of mysticism on which he had been
trained.

�I have seen the low countryman in arms, and I have nought to say
against him. Heavy and slow is he by nature, and is not to be brought
into battle for the sake of a lady's eyelash or the twang of a
minstrel's string, like the hotter blood of the south. But ma foi! lay
hand on his wool-bales, or trifle with his velvet of Bruges, and out
buzzes every stout burgher, like bees from the tee-hole, ready to lay on
as though it were his one business in life. By our lady! they have shown
the French at Courtrai and elsewhere that they are as deft in wielding
steel as in welding it.�

�And the men of Spain?�

�They too are very hardy soldiers, the more so as for many hundred years
they have had to fight hard against the cursed followers of the black
Mahound, who have pressed upon them from the south, and still, as I
understand, hold the fairer half of the country. I had a turn with them
upon the sea when they came over to Winchelsea and the good queen with
her ladies sat upon the cliffs looking down at us, as if it had been
joust or tourney. By my hilt! it was a sight that was worth the seeing,
for all that was best in England was out on the water that day. We went
forth in little ships and came back in great galleys--for of fifty tall
ships of Spain, over two score flew the Cross of St. George ere the sun
had set. But now, youngster, I have answered you freely, and I trow it
is time that you answered me. Let things be plat and plain between us. I
am a man who shoots straight at his mark. You saw the things I had
with me at yonder hostel: name which you will, save only the box of
rose-colored sugar which I take to the Lady Loring, and you shall have
it if you will but come with me to France.�

�Nay,� said Alleyne, �I would gladly come with ye to France or where
else ye will, just to list to your talk, and because ye are the only two
friends that I have in the whole wide world outside of the cloisters;
but, indeed, it may not be, for my duty is towards my brother, seeing
that father and mother are dead, and he my elder. Besides, when ye talk
of taking me to France, ye do not conceive how useless I should be to
you, seeing that neither by training nor by nature am I fitted for the
wars, and there seems to be nought but strife in those parts.�

�That comes from my fool's talk,� cried the archer; �for being a man of
no learning myself, my tongue turns to blades and targets, even as
my hand does. Know then that for every parchment in England there are
twenty in France. For every statue, cut gem, shrine, carven screen,
or what else might please the eye of a learned clerk, there are a good
hundred to our one. At the spoiling of Carcasonne I have seen chambers
stored with writing, though not one man in our Company could read them.
Again, in Arles and Nimes, and other towns that I could name, there are
the great arches and fortalices still standing which were built of old
by giant men who came from the south. Can I not see by your brightened
eye how you would love to look upon these things? Come then with me,
and, by these ten finger-bones! there is not one of them which you shall
not see.�

�I should indeed love to look upon them,� Alleyne answered; �but I have
come from Beaulieu for a purpose, and I must be true to my service, even
as thou art true to thine.�

�Bethink you again, mon ami,� quoth Aylward, �that you might do much
good yonder, since there are three hundred men in the Company, and none
who has ever a word of grace for them, and yet the Virgin knows that
there was never a set of men who were in more need of it. Sickerly the
one duty may balance the other. Your brother hath done without you this
many a year, and, as I gather, he hath never walked as far as Beaulieu
to see you during all that time, so he cannot be in any great need of
you.�

�Besides,� said John, �the Socman of Minstead is a by-word through the
forest, from Bramshaw Hill to Holmesley Walk. He is a drunken, brawling,
perilous churl, as you may find to your cost.�

�The more reason that I should strive to mend him,� quoth Alleyne.
�There is no need to urge me, friends, for my own wishes would draw
me to France, and it would be a joy to me if I could go with you. But
indeed and indeed it cannot be, so here I take my leave of you, for
yonder square tower amongst the trees upon the right must surely be the
church of Minstead, and I may reach it by this path through the woods.�

�Well, God be with thee, lad!� cried the archer, pressing Alleyne to his
heart. �I am quick to love, and quick to hate and 'fore God I am loth to
part.�

�Would it not be well,� said John, �that we should wait here, and see
what manner of greeting you have from your brother. You may prove to be
as welcome as the king's purveyor to the village dame.�

�Nay, nay,� he answered; �ye must not bide for me, for where I go I
stay.�

�Yet it may be as well that you should know whither we go,� said the
archer. �We shall now journey south through the woods until we come out
upon the Christchurch road, and so onwards, hoping to-night to reach the
castle of Sir William Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, of which Sir Nigel
Loring is constable. There we shall bide, and it is like enough that for
a month or more you may find us there, ere we are ready for our viage
back to France.�

It was hard indeed for Alleyne to break away from these two new but
hearty friends, and so strong was the combat between his conscience
and his inclinations that he dared not look round, lest his resolution
should slip away from him. It was not until he was deep among the tree
trunks that he cast a glance backwards, when he found that he could
still see them through the branches on the road above him. The archer
was standing with folded arms, his bow jutting from over his shoulder,
and the sun gleaming brightly upon his head-piece and the links of
his chain-mail. Beside him stood his giant recruit, still clad in the
home-spun and ill-fitting garments of the fuller of Lymington, with arms
and legs shooting out of his scanty garb. Even as Alleyne watched them
they turned upon their heels and plodded off together upon their way.



CHAPTER IX. HOW STRANGE THINGS BEFELL IN MINSTEAD WOOD.


The path which the young clerk had now to follow lay through a
magnificent forest of the very heaviest timber, where the giant bowls
of oak and of beech formed long aisles in every direction, shooting
up their huge branches to build the majestic arches of Nature's own
cathedral. Beneath lay a broad carpet of the softest and greenest moss,
flecked over with fallen leaves, but yielding pleasantly to the foot of
the traveller. The track which guided him was one so seldom used that in
places it lost itself entirely among the grass, to reappear as a reddish
rut between the distant tree trunks. It was very still here in the heart
of the woodlands. The gentle rustle of the branches and the distant
cooing of pigeons were the only sounds which broke in upon the silence,
save that once Alleyne heard afar off a merry call upon a hunting bugle
and the shrill yapping of the hounds.

It was not without some emotion that he looked upon the scene around
him, for, in spite of his secluded life, he knew enough of the ancient
greatness of his own family to be aware that the time had been when they
had held undisputed and paramount sway over all that tract of country.
His father could trace his pure Saxon lineage back to that Godfrey Malf
who had held the manors of Bisterne and of Minstead at the time when the
Norman first set mailed foot upon English soil. The afforestation of the
district, however, and its conversion into a royal demesne had
clipped off a large section of his estate, while other parts had been
confiscated as a punishment for his supposed complicity in an abortive
Saxon rising. The fate of the ancestor had been typical of that of his
descendants. During three hundred years their domains had gradually
contracted, sometimes through royal or feudal encroachment, and
sometimes through such gifts to the Church as that with which Alleyne's
father had opened the doors of Beaulieu Abbey to his younger son. The
importance of the family had thus dwindled, but they still retained the
old Saxon manor-house, with a couple of farms and a grove large enough
to afford pannage to a hundred pigs--�sylva de centum porcis,� as the
old family parchments describe it. Above all, the owner of the soil
could still hold his head high as the veritable Socman of Minstead--that
is, as holding the land in free socage, with no feudal superior, and
answerable to no man lower than the king. Knowing this, Alleyne felt
some little glow of worldly pride as he looked for the first time
upon the land with which so many generations of his ancestors had been
associated. He pushed on the quicker, twirling his staff merrily, and
looking out at every turn of the path for some sign of the old Saxon
residence. He was suddenly arrested, however, by the appearance of a
wild-looking fellow armed with a club, who sprang out from behind a tree
and barred his passage. He was a rough, powerful peasant, with cap and
tunic of untanned sheepskin, leather breeches, and galligaskins round
legs and feet.

�Stand!� he shouted, raising his heavy cudgel to enforce the order. �Who
are you who walk so freely through the wood? Whither would you go, and
what is your errand?�

�Why should I answer your questions, my friend?� said Alleyne, standing
on his guard.

�Because your tongue may save your pate. But where have I looked upon
your face before?�

�No longer ago than last night at the 'Pied Merlin,'� the clerk
answered, recognizing the escaped serf who had been so outspoken as to
his wrongs.

�By the Virgin! yes. You were the little clerk who sat so mum in the
corner, and then cried fy on the gleeman. What hast in the scrip?�

�Naught of any price.�

�How can I tell that, clerk? Let me see.�

�Not I.�

�Fool! I could pull you limb from limb like a pullet. What would you
have? Hast forgot that we are alone far from all men? How can your
clerkship help you? Wouldst lose scrip and life too?�

�I will part with neither without fight.�

�A fight, quotha? A fight betwixt spurred cock and new hatched chicken!
Thy fighting days may soon be over.�

�Hadst asked me in the name of charity I would have given freely,� cried
Alleyne. �As it stands, not one farthing shall you have with my free
will, and when I see my brother, the Socman of Minstead, he will raise
hue and cry from vill to vill, from hundred to hundred, until you are
taken as a common robber and a scourge to the country.�

The outlaw sank his club. �The Socman's brother!� he gasped. �Now,
by the keys of Peter! I had rather that hand withered and tongue was
palsied ere I had struck or miscalled you. If you are the Socman's
brother you are one of the right side, I warrant, for all your clerkly
dress.�

�His brother I am,� said Alleyne. �But if I were not, is that reason why
you should molest me on the king's ground?�

�I give not the pip of an apple for king or for noble,� cried the serf
passionately. �Ill have I had from them, and ill I shall repay them. I
am a good friend to my friends, and, by the Virgin! an evil foeman to my
foes.�

�And therefore the worst of foemen to thyself,� said Alleyne. �But I
pray you, since you seem to know him, to point out to me the shortest
path to my brother's house.�

The serf was about to reply, when the clear ringing call of a bugle
burst from the wood close behind them, and Alleyne caught sight for
an instant of the dun side and white breast of a lordly stag glancing
swiftly betwixt the distant tree trunks. A minute later came the shaggy
deer-hounds, a dozen or fourteen of them, running on a hot scent, with
nose to earth and tail in air. As they streamed past the silent forest
around broke suddenly into loud life, with galloping of hoofs, crackling
of brushwood, and the short, sharp cries of the hunters. Close behind
the pack rode a fourrier and a yeoman-pricker, whooping on the laggards
and encouraging the leaders, in the shrill half-French jargon which was
the language of venery and woodcraft. Alleyne was still gazing
after them, listening to the loud �Hyke-a-Bayard! Hyke-a-Pomers!
Hyke-a-Lebryt!� with which they called upon their favorite hounds, when
a group of horsemen crashed out through the underwood at the very spot
where the serf and he were standing.

The one who led was a man between fifty and sixty years of age, war-worn
and weather-beaten, with a broad, thoughtful forehead and eyes which
shone brightly from under his fierce and overhung brows. His beard,
streaked thickly with gray, bristled forward from his chin, and spoke
of a passionate nature, while the long, finely cut face and firm mouth
marked the leader of men. His figure was erect and soldierly, and he
rode his horse with the careless grace of a man whose life had been
spent in the saddle. In common garb, his masterful face and flashing
eye would have marked him as one who was born to rule; but now, with his
silken tunic powdered with golden fleurs-de-lis, his velvet mantle lined
with the royal minever, and the lions of England stamped in silver upon
his harness, none could fail to recognize the noble Edward, most warlike
and powerful of all the long line of fighting monarchs who had ruled
the Anglo-Norman race. Alleyne doffed hat and bowed head at the sight
of him, but the serf folded his hands and leaned them upon his cudgel,
looking with little love at the knot of nobles and knights-in-waiting
who rode behind the king.

�Ha!� cried Edward, reining up for an instant his powerful black steed.
�Le cerf est passe? Non? Ici, Brocas; tu parles Anglais.�

�The deer, clowns?� said a hard-visaged, swarthy-faced man, who rode at
the king's elbow. �If ye have headed it back it is as much as your ears
are worth.�

�It passed by the blighted beech there,� said Alleyne, pointing, �and
the hounds were hard at its heels.�

�It is well,� cried Edward, still speaking in French: for, though he
could understand English, he had never learned to express himself in so
barbarous and unpolished a tongue. �By my faith, sirs,� he continued,
half turning in his saddle to address his escort, �unless my woodcraft
is sadly at fault, it is a stag of six tines and the finest that we have
roused this journey. A golden St. Hubert to the man who is the first to
sound the mort.� He shook his bridle as he spoke, and thundered away,
his knights lying low upon their horses and galloping as hard as whip
and spur would drive them, in the hope of winning the king's prize. Away
they drove down the long green glade--bay horses, black and gray, riders
clad in every shade of velvet, fur, or silk, with glint of brazen horn
and flash of knife and spear. One only lingered, the black-browed Baron
Brocas, who, making a gambade which brought him within arm-sweep of
the serf, slashed him across the face with his riding-whip. �Doff, dog,
doff,� he hissed, �when a monarch deigns to lower his eyes to such as
you!�--then spurred through the underwood and was gone, with a gleam of
steel shoes and flutter of dead leaves.

The villein took the cruel blow without wince or cry, as one to whom
stripes are a birthright and an inheritance. His eyes flashed, however,
and he shook his bony hand with a fierce wild gesture after the
retreating figure.

�Black hound of Gascony,� he muttered, �evil the day that you and those
like you set foot in free England! I know thy kennel of Rochecourt. The
night will come when I may do to thee and thine what you and your class
have wrought upon mine and me. May God smite me if I fail to smite thee,
thou French robber, with thy wife and thy child and all that is under
thy castle roof!�

�Forbear!� cried Alleyne. �Mix not God's name with these unhallowed
threats! And yet it was a coward's blow, and one to stir the blood and
loose the tongue of the most peaceful. Let me find some soothing simples
and lay them on the weal to draw the sting.�

�Nay, there is but one thing that can draw the sting, and that the
future may bring to me. But, clerk, if you would see your brother you
must on, for there is a meeting to-day, and his merry men will await him
ere the shadows turn from west to east. I pray you not to hold him back,
for it would be an evil thing if all the stout lads were there and the
leader a-missing. I would come with you, but sooth to say I am stationed
here and may not move. The path over yonder, betwixt the oak and the
thorn, should bring you out into his nether field.�

Alleyne lost no time in following the directions of the wild, masterless
man, whom he left among the trees where he had found him. His heart was
the heavier for the encounter, not only because all bitterness and wrath
were abhorrent to his gentle nature, but also because it disturbed him
to hear his brother spoken of as though he were a chief of outlaws or
the leader of a party against the state. Indeed, of all the things which
he had seen yet in the world to surprise him there was none more
strange than the hate which class appeared to bear to class. The talk
of laborer, woodman and villein in the inn had all pointed to the
wide-spread mutiny, and now his brother's name was spoken as though he
were the very centre of the universal discontent. In good truth, the
commons throughout the length and breadth of the land were heart-weary
of this fine game of chivalry which had been played so long at their
expense. So long as knight and baron were a strength and a guard to the
kingdom they might be endured, but now, when all men knew that the great
battles in France had been won by English yeomen and Welsh stabbers,
warlike fame, the only fame to which his class had ever aspired,
appeared to have deserted the plate-clad horsemen. The sports of the
lists had done much in days gone by to impress the minds of the people,
but the plumed and unwieldy champion was no longer an object either of
fear or of reverence to men whose fathers and brothers had shot into the
press at Crecy or Poitiers, and seen the proudest chivalry in the world
unable to make head against the weapons of disciplined peasants. Power
had changed hands. The protector had become the protected, and the whole
fabric of the feudal system was tottering to a fall. Hence the fierce
mutterings of the lower classes and the constant discontent, breaking
out into local tumult and outrage, and culminating some years later in
the great rising of Tyler. What Alleyne saw and wondered at in Hampshire
would have appealed equally to the traveller in any other English county
from the Channel to the marches of Scotland.

He was following the track, his misgivings increasing with every step
which took him nearer to that home which he had never seen, when of a
sudden the trees began to thin and the sward to spread out onto a broad,
green lawn, where five cows lay in the sunshine and droves of black
swine wandered unchecked. A brown forest stream swirled down the centre
of this clearing, with a rude bridge flung across it, and on the other
side was a second field sloping up to a long, low-lying wooden house,
with thatched roof and open squares for windows. Alleyne gazed across
at it with flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes--for this, he knew, must
be the home of his fathers. A wreath of blue smoke floated up through a
hole in the thatch, and was the only sign of life in the place, save a
great black hound which lay sleeping chained to the door-post. In the
yellow shimmer of the autumn sunshine it lay as peacefully and as still
as he had oft pictured it to himself in his dreams.

He was roused, however, from his pleasant reverie by the sound of
voices, and two people emerged from the forest some little way to his
right and moved across the field in the direction of the bridge. The one
was a man with yellow flowing beard and very long hair of the same tint
drooping over his shoulders; his dress of good Norwich cloth and his
assured bearing marked him as a man of position, while the sombre hue
of his clothes and the absence of all ornament contrasted with the flash
and glitter which had marked the king's retinue. By his side walked
a woman, tall and slight and dark, with lithe, graceful figure and
clear-cut, composed features. Her jet-black hair was gathered back under
a light pink coif, her head poised proudly upon her neck, and her step
long and springy, like that of some wild, tireless woodland creature.
She held her left hand in front of her, covered with a red velvet glove,
and on the wrist a little brown falcon, very fluffy and bedraggled,
which she smoothed and fondled as she walked. As she came out into the
sunshine, Alleyne noticed that her light gown, slashed with pink, was
all stained with earth and with moss upon one side from shoulder to hem.
He stood in the shadow of an oak staring at her with parted lips, for
this woman seemed to him to be the most beautiful and graceful creature
that mind could conceive of. Such had he imagined the angels, and such
he had tried to paint them in the Beaulieu missals; but here there was
something human, were it only in the battered hawk and discolored dress,
which sent a tingle and thrill through his nerves such as no dream of
radiant and stainless spirit had ever yet been able to conjure up. Good,
quiet, uncomplaining mother Nature, long slighted and miscalled, still
bides her time and draws to her bosom the most errant of her children.

The two walked swiftly across the meadow to the narrow bridge, he in
front and she a pace or two behind. There they paused, and stood for
a few minutes face to face talking earnestly. Alleyne had read and
had heard of love and of lovers. Such were these, doubtless--this
golden-bearded man and the fair damsel with the cold, proud face. Why
else should they wander together in the woods, or be so lost in talk by
rustic streams? And yet as he watched, uncertain whether to advance from
the cover or to choose some other path to the house, he soon came
to doubt the truth of this first conjecture. The man stood, tall and
square, blocking the entrance to the bridge, and throwing out his hands
as he spoke in a wild eager fashion, while the deep tones of his stormy
voice rose at times into accents of menace and of anger. She stood
fearlessly in front of him, still stroking her bird; but twice she threw
a swift questioning glance over her shoulder, as one who is in search
of aid. So moved was the young clerk by these mute appeals, that he came
forth from the trees and crossed the meadow, uncertain what to do, and
yet loth to hold back from one who might need his aid. So intent were
they upon each other that neither took note of his approach; until, when
he was close upon them, the man threw his arm roughly round the damsel's
waist and drew her towards him, she straining her lithe, supple figure
away and striking fiercely at him, while the hooded hawk screamed with
ruffled wings and pecked blindly in its mistress's defence. Bird and
maid, however, had but little chance against their assailant who,
laughing loudly, caught her wrist in one hand while he drew her towards
him with the other.

�The best rose has ever the longest thorns,� said he. �Quiet, little
one, or you may do yourself a hurt. Must pay Saxon toll on Saxon land,
my proud Maude, for all your airs and graces.�

�You boor!� she hissed. �You base underbred clod! Is this your care and
your hospitality? I would rather wed a branded serf from my father's
fields. Leave go, I say----Ah! good youth, Heaven has sent you. Make him
loose me! By the honor of your mother, I pray you to stand by me and to
make this knave loose me.�

�Stand by you I will, and that blithely,� said Alleyne. �Surely, sir,
you should take shame to hold the damsel against her will.�

The man turned a face upon him which was lion-like in its strength and
in its wrath. With his tangle of golden hair, his fierce blue eyes, and
his large, well-marked features, he was the most comely man whom Alleyne
had ever seen, and yet there was something so sinister and so fell in
his expression that child or beast might well have shrunk from him. His
brows were drawn, his cheek flushed, and there was a mad sparkle in his
eyes which spoke of a wild, untamable nature.

�Young fool!� he cried, holding the woman still to his side, though
every line of her shrinking figure spoke her abhorrence. �Do you keep
your spoon in your own broth. I rede you to go on your way, lest worse
befall you. This little wench has come with me and with me she shall
bide.�

�Liar!� cried the woman; and, stooping her head, she suddenly bit
fiercely into the broad brown hand which held her. He whipped it back
with an oath, while she tore herself free and slipped behind Alleyne,
cowering up against him like the trembling leveret who sees the falcon
poising for the swoop above him.

�Stand off my land!� the man said fiercely, heedless of the blood which
trickled freely from his fingers. �What have you to do here? By your
dress you should be one of those cursed clerks who overrun the land like
vile rats, poking and prying into other men's concerns, too caitiff to
fight and too lazy to work. By the rood! if I had my will upon ye, I
should nail you upon the abbey doors, as they hang vermin before their
holes. Art neither man nor woman, young shaveling. Get thee back to thy
fellows ere I lay hands upon you: for your foot is on my land, and I may
slay you as a common draw-latch.�

�Is this your land, then?� gasped Alleyne.

�Would you dispute it, dog? Would you wish by trick or quibble to juggle
me out of these last acres? Know, base-born knave, that you have dared
this day to stand in the path of one whose race have been the advisers
of kings and the leaders of hosts, ere ever this vile crew of Norman
robbers came into the land, or such half-blood hounds as you were let
loose to preach that the thief should have his booty and the honest man
should sin if he strove to win back his own.�

�You are the Socman of Minstead?�

�That am I; and the son of Edric the Socman, of the pure blood of
Godfrey the thane, by the only daughter of the house of Aluric, whose
forefathers held the white-horse banner at the fatal fight where our
shield was broken and our sword shivered. I tell you, clerk, that my
folk held this land from Bramshaw Wood to the Ringwood road; and, by the
soul of my father! it will be a strange thing if I am to be bearded upon
the little that is left of it. Begone, I say, and meddle not with my
affair.�

�If you leave me now,� whispered the woman, �then shame forever upon
your manhood.�

�Surely, sir,� said Alleyne, speaking in as persuasive and soothing a
way as he could, �if your birth is gentle, there is the more reason that
your manners should be gentle too. I am well persuaded that you did but
jest with this lady, and that you will now permit her to leave your land
either alone or with me as a guide, if she should need one, through the
wood. As to birth, it does not become me to boast, and there is sooth in
what you say as to the unworthiness of clerks, but it is none the less
true that I am as well born as you.�

�Dog!� cried the furious Socman, �there is no man in the south who can
say as much.�

�Yet can I,� said Alleyne smiling; �for indeed I also am the son of
Edric the Socman, of the pure blood of Godfrey the thane, by the only
daughter of Aluric of Brockenhurst. Surely, dear brother,� he continued,
holding out his hand, �you have a warmer greeting than this for me.
There are but two boughs left upon this old, old Saxon trunk.�

His elder brother dashed his hand aside with an oath, while an
expression of malignant hatred passed over his passion-drawn features.
�You are the young cub of Beaulieu, then,� said he. �I might have known
it by the sleek face and the slavish manner too monk-ridden and craven
in spirit to answer back a rough word. Thy father, shaveling, with all
his faults, had a man's heart; and there were few who could look him in
the eyes on the day of his anger. But you! Look there, rat, on yonder
field where the cows graze, and on that other beyond, and on the orchard
hard by the church. Do you know that all these were squeezed out of
your dying father by greedy priests, to pay for your upbringing in the
cloisters? I, the Socman, am shorn of my lands that you may snivel Latin
and eat bread for which you never did hand's turn. You rob me first, and
now you would come preaching and whining, in search mayhap of another
field or two for your priestly friends. Knave! my dogs shall be set upon
you; but, meanwhile, stand out of my path, and stop me at your peril!�
 As he spoke he rushed forward, and, throwing the lad to one side, caught
the woman's wrist. Alleyne, however, as active as a young deer-hound,
sprang to her aid and seized her by the other arm, raising his iron-shod
staff as he did so.

�You may say what you will to me,� he said between his clenched
teeth--�it may be no better than I deserve; but, brother or no, I swear
by my hopes of salvation that I will break your arm if you do not leave
hold of the maid.�

There was a ring in his voice and a flash in his eyes which promised
that the blow would follow quick at the heels of the word. For a moment
the blood of the long line of hot-headed thanes was too strong for the
soft whisperings of the doctrine of meekness and mercy. He was conscious
of a fierce wild thrill through his nerves and a throb of mad gladness
at his heart, as his real human self burst for an instant the bonds
of custom and of teaching which had held it so long. The socman sprang
back, looking to left and to right for some stick or stone which might
serve him for weapon; but finding none, he turned and ran at the top of
his speed for the house, blowing the while upon a shrill whistle.

�Come!� gasped the woman. �Fly, friend, ere he come back.�

�Nay, let him come!� cried Alleyne. �I shall not budge a foot for him or
his dogs.�

�Come, come!� she cried, tugging at his arm. �I know the man: he will
kill you. Come, for the Virgin's sake, or for my sake, for I cannot go
and leave you here.�

�Come, then,� said he; and they ran together to the cover of the woods.
As they gained the edge of the brushwood, Alleyne, looking back, saw his
brother come running out of the house again, with the sun gleaming upon
his hair and his beard. He held something which flashed in his right
hand, and he stooped at the threshold to unloose the black hound.

�This way!� the woman whispered, in a low eager voice. �Through the
bushes to that forked ash. Do not heed me; I can run as fast as you, I
trow. Now into the stream--right in, over ankles, to throw the dog off,
though I think it is but a common cur, like its master.� As she spoke,
she sprang herself into the shallow stream and ran swiftly up the
centre of it, with the brown water bubbling over her feet and her
hand out-stretched toward the clinging branches of bramble or sapling.
Alleyne followed close at her heels, with his mind in a whirl at this
black welcome and sudden shifting of all his plans and hopes. Yet, grave
as were his thoughts, they would still turn to wonder as he looked at
the twinkling feet of his guide and saw her lithe figure bend this way
and that, dipping under boughs, springing over stones, with a lightness
and ease which made it no small task for him to keep up with her. At
last, when he was almost out of breath, she suddenly threw herself down
upon a mossy bank, between two holly-bushes, and looked ruefully at her
own dripping feet and bedraggled skirt.

�Holy Mary!� said she, �what shall I do? Mother will keep me to my
chamber for a month, and make me work at the tapestry of the nine bold
knights. She promised as much last week, when I fell into Wilverley bog,
and yet she knows that I cannot abide needle-work.�

Alleyne, still standing in the stream, glanced down at the graceful
pink-and-white figure, the curve of raven-black hair, and the proud,
sensitive face which looked up frankly and confidingly at his own.

�We had best on,� he said. �He may yet overtake us.�

�Not so. We are well off his land now, nor can he tell in this great
wood which way we have taken. But you--you had him at your mercy. Why
did you not kill him?�

�Kill him! My brother!�

�And why not?�--with a quick gleam of her white teeth. �He would have
killed you. I know him, and I read it in his eyes. Had I had your staff
I would have tried--aye, and done it, too.� She shook her clenched white
hand as she spoke, and her lips tightened ominously.

�I am already sad in heart for what I have done,� said he, sitting down
on the bank, and sinking his face into his hands. �God help me!--all
that is worst in me seemed to come uppermost. Another instant, and I
had smitten him: the son of my own mother, the man whom I have longed to
take to my heart. Alas! that I should still be so weak.�

�Weak!� she exclaimed, raising her black eyebrows. �I do not think that
even my father himself, who is a hard judge of manhood, would call you
that. But it is, as you may think, sir, a very pleasant thing for me to
hear that you are grieved at what you have done, and I can but rede
that we should go back together, and you should make your peace with the
Socman by handing back your prisoner. It is a sad thing that so small a
thing as a woman should come between two who are of one blood.�

Simple Alleyne opened his eyes at this little spurt of feminine
bitterness. �Nay, lady,� said he, �that were worst of all. What man
would be so caitiff and thrall as to fail you at your need? I have
turned my brother against me, and now, alas! I appear to have given you
offence also with my clumsy tongue. But, indeed, lady, I am torn both
ways, and can scarce grasp in my mind what it is that has befallen.�

�Nor can I marvel at that,� said she, with a little tinkling laugh. �You
came in as the knight does in the jongleur's romances, between dragon
and damsel, with small time for the asking of questions. Come,� she went
on, springing to her feet, and smoothing down her rumpled frock, �let us
walk through the shaw together, and we may come upon Bertrand with the
horses. If poor Troubadour had not cast a shoe, we should not have had
this trouble. Nay, I must have your arm: for, though I speak lightly,
now that all is happily over I am as frightened as my brave Roland. See
how his chest heaves, and his dear feathers all awry--the little knight
who would not have his lady mishandled.� So she prattled on to her hawk,
while Alleyne walked by her side, stealing a glance from time to time at
this queenly and wayward woman. In silence they wandered together over
the velvet turf and on through the broad Minstead woods, where the
old lichen-draped beeches threw their circles of black shadow upon the
sunlit sward.

�You have no wish, then, to hear my story?� said she, at last.

�If it pleases you to tell it me,� he answered.

�Oh!� she cried tossing her head, �if it is of so little interest to
you, we had best let it bide.�

�Nay,� said he eagerly, �I would fain hear it.�

�You have a right to know it, if you have lost a brother's favor through
it. And yet----Ah well, you are, as I understand, a clerk, so I
must think of you as one step further in orders, and make you my
father-confessor. Know then that this man has been a suitor for my hand,
less as I think for my own sweet sake than because he hath ambition and
had it on his mind that he might improve his fortunes by dipping into
my father's strong box--though the Virgin knows that he would have found
little enough therein. My father, however, is a proud man, a gallant
knight and tried soldier of the oldest blood, to whom this man's
churlish birth and low descent----Oh, lackaday! I had forgot that he was
of the same strain as yourself.�

�Nay, trouble not for that,� said Alleyne, �we are all from good mother
Eve.�

�Streams may spring from one source, and yet some be clear and some be
foul,� quoth she quickly. �But, to be brief over the matter, my father
would have none of his wooing, nor in sooth would I. On that he swore
a vow against us, and as he is known to be a perilous man, with many
outlaws and others at his back, my father forbade that I should hawk or
hunt in any part of the wood to the north of the Christchurch road. As
it chanced, however, this morning my little Roland here was loosed at a
strong-winged heron, and page Bertrand and I rode on, with no thoughts
but for the sport, until we found ourselves in Minstead woods. Small
harm then, but that my horse Troubadour trod with a tender foot upon a
sharp stick, rearing and throwing me to the ground. See to my gown, the
third that I have befouled within the week. Woe worth me when Agatha the
tire-woman sets eyes upon it!�

�And what then, lady?� asked Alleyne.

�Why, then away ran Troubadour, for belike I spurred him in falling,
and Bertrand rode after him as hard as hoofs could bear him. When I rose
there was the Socman himself by my side, with the news that I was on
his land, but with so many courteous words besides, and such gallant
bearing, that he prevailed upon me to come to his house for shelter,
there to wait until the page return. By the grace of the Virgin and the
help of my patron St. Magdalen, I stopped short ere I reached his
door, though, as you saw, he strove to hale me up to it. And
then--ah-h-h-h!�--she shivered and chattered like one in an ague-fit.

�What is it?� cried Alleyne, looking about in alarm.

�Nothing, friend, nothing! I was but thinking how I bit into his hand.
Sooner would I bite living toad or poisoned snake. Oh, I shall loathe my
lips forever! But you--how brave you were, and how quick! How meek for
yourself, and how bold for a stranger! If I were a man, I should wish to
do what you have done.�

�It was a small thing,� he answered, with a tingle of pleasure at these
sweet words of praise. �But you--what will you do?�

�There is a great oak near here, and I think that Bertrand will bring
the horses there, for it is an old hunting-tryst of ours. Then hey for
home, and no more hawking to-day! A twelve-mile gallop will dry feet and
skirt.�

�But your father?�

�Not one word shall I tell him. You do not know him; but I can tell you
he is not a man to disobey as I have disobeyed him. He would avenge me,
it is true, but it is not to him that I shall look for vengeance. Some
day, perchance, in joust or in tourney, knight may wish to wear my
colors, and then I shall tell him that if he does indeed crave my favor
there is wrong unredressed, and the wronger the Socman of Minstead. So
my knight shall find a venture such as bold knights love, and my debt
shall be paid, and my father none the wiser, and one rogue the less in
the world. Say, is not that a brave plan?�

�Nay, lady, it is a thought which is unworthy of you. How can such as
you speak of violence and of vengeance. Are none to be gentle and kind,
none to be piteous and forgiving? Alas! it is a hard, cruel world, and I
would that I had never left my abbey cell. To hear such words from your
lips is as though I heard an angel of grace preaching the devil's own
creed.�

She started from him as a young colt who first feels the bit. �Gramercy
for your rede, young sir!� she said, with a little curtsey. �As I
understand your words, you are grieved that you ever met me, and look
upon me as a preaching devil. Why, my father is a bitter man when he is
wroth, but hath never called me such a name as that. It may be his right
and duty, but certes it is none of thine. So it would be best, since you
think so lowly of me, that you should take this path to the left while
I keep on upon this one; for it is clear that I can be no fit companion
for you.� So saying, with downcast lids and a dignity which was somewhat
marred by her bedraggled skirt, she swept off down the muddy track,
leaving Alleyne standing staring ruefully after her. He waited in vain
for some backward glance or sign of relenting, but she walked on with
a rigid neck until her dress was only a white flutter among the leaves.
Then, with a sunken head and a heavy heart, he plodded wearily down the
other path, wroth with himself for the rude and uncouth tongue which had
given offence where so little was intended.

He had gone some way, lost in doubt and in self-reproach, his mind all
tremulous with a thousand new-found thoughts and fears and wonderments,
when of a sudden there was a light rustle of the leaves behind him, and,
glancing round, there was this graceful, swift-footed creature, treading
in his very shadow, with her proud head bowed, even as his was--the
picture of humility and repentance.

�I shall not vex you, nor even speak,� she said; �but I would fain keep
with you while we are in the wood.�

�Nay, you cannot vex me,� he answered, all warm again at the very sight
of her. �It was my rough words which vexed you; but I have been thrown
among men all my life, and indeed, with all the will, I scarce know how
to temper my speech to a lady's ear.�

�Then unsay it,� cried she quickly; �say that I was right to wish to
have vengeance on the Socman.�

�Nay, I cannot do that,� he answered gravely.

�Then who is ungentle and unkind now?� she cried in triumph. �How stern
and cold you are for one so young! Art surely no mere clerk, but bishop
or cardinal at the least. Shouldst have crozier for staff and mitre
for cap. Well, well, for your sake I will forgive the Socman and take
vengeance on none but on my own wilful self who must needs run into
danger's path. So will that please you, sir?�

�There spoke your true self,� said he; �and you will find more pleasure
in such forgiveness than in any vengeance.�

She shook her head, as if by no means assured of it, and then with a
sudden little cry, which had more of surprise than of joy in it, �Here
is Bertrand with the horses!�

Down the glade there came a little green-clad page with laughing eyes,
and long curls floating behind him. He sat perched on a high bay horse,
and held on to the bridle of a spirited black palfrey, the hides of both
glistening from a long run.

�I have sought you everywhere, dear Lady Maude,� said he in a
piping voice, springing down from his horse and holding the stirrup.
�Troubadour galloped as far as Holmhill ere I could catch him. I trust
that you have had no hurt or scath?� He shot a questioning glance at
Alleyne as he spoke.

�No, Bertrand,� said she, �thanks to this courteous stranger. And now,
sir,� she continued, springing into her saddle, �it is not fit that I
leave you without a word more. Clerk or no, you have acted this day as
becomes a true knight. King Arthur and all his table could not have done
more. It may be that, as some small return, my father or his kin may
have power to advance your interest. He is not rich, but he is honored
and hath great friends. Tell me what is your purpose, and see if he may
not aid it.�

�Alas! lady, I have now no purpose. I have but two friends in the world,
and they have gone to Christchurch, where it is likely I shall join
them.�

�And where is Christchurch?�

�At the castle which is held by the brave knight, Sir Nigel Loring,
constable to the Earl of Salisbury.�

To his surprise she burst out a-laughing, and, spurring her palfrey,
dashed off down the glade, with her page riding behind her. Not one word
did she say, but as she vanished amid the trees she half turned in her
saddle and waved a last greeting. Long time he stood, half hoping that
she might again come back to him; but the thud of the hoofs had died
away, and there was no sound in all the woods but the gentle rustle and
dropping of the leaves. At last he turned away and made his way back to
the high-road--another person from the light-hearted boy who had left it
a short three hours before.



CHAPTER X. HOW HORDLE JOHN FOUND A MAN WHOM HE MIGHT FOLLOW.


If he might not return to Beaulieu within the year, and if his brother's
dogs were to be set upon him if he showed face upon Minstead land, then
indeed he was adrift upon earth. North, south, east, and west--he might
turn where he would, but all was equally chill and cheerless. The Abbot
had rolled ten silver crowns in a lettuce-leaf and hid them away in the
bottom of his scrip, but that would be a sorry support for twelve long
months. In all the darkness there was but the one bright spot of the
sturdy comrades whom he had left that morning; if he could find them
again all would be well. The afternoon was not very advanced, for all
that had befallen him. When a man is afoot at cock-crow much may be done
in the day. If he walked fast he might yet overtake his friends ere they
reached their destination. He pushed on therefore, now walking and now
running. As he journeyed he bit into a crust which remained from his
Beaulieu bread, and he washed it down by a draught from a woodland
stream.

It was no easy or light thing to journey through this great forest,
which was some twenty miles from east to west and a good sixteen from
Bramshaw Woods in the north to Lymington in the south. Alleyne, however,
had the good fortune to fall in with a woodman, axe upon shoulder,
trudging along in the very direction that he wished to go. With his
guidance he passed the fringe of Bolderwood Walk, famous for old ash
and yew, through Mark Ash with its giant beech-trees, and on through
the Knightwood groves, where the giant oak was already a great tree,
but only one of many comely brothers. They plodded along together, the
woodman and Alleyne, with little talk on either side, for their thoughts
were as far asunder as the poles. The peasant's gossip had been of the
hunt, of the bracken, of the gray-headed kites that had nested in Wood
Fidley, and of the great catch of herring brought back by the boats of
Pitt's Deep. The clerk's mind was on his brother, on his future--above
all on this strange, fierce, melting, beautiful woman who had broken
so suddenly into his life, and as suddenly passed out of it again. So
_distrait_ was he and so random his answers, that the woodman took
to whistling, and soon branched off upon the track to Burley, leaving
Alleyne upon the main Christchurch road.

Down this he pushed as fast as he might, hoping at every turn and rise
to catch sight of his companions of the morning. From Vinney Ridge to
Rhinefield Walk the woods grow thick and dense up to the very edges of
the track, but beyond the country opens up into broad dun-colored moors,
flecked with clumps of trees, and topping each other in long, low curves
up to the dark lines of forest in the furthest distance. Clouds of
insects danced and buzzed in the golden autumn light, and the air was
full of the piping of the song-birds. Long, glinting dragonflies shot
across the path, or hung tremulous with gauzy wings and gleaming bodies.
Once a white-necked sea eagle soared screaming high over the traveller's
head, and again a flock of brown bustards popped up from among the
bracken, and blundered away in their clumsy fashion, half running, half
flying, with strident cry and whirr of wings.

There were folk, too, to be met upon the road--beggars and couriers,
chapmen and tinkers--cheery fellows for the most part, with a rough jest
and homely greeting for each other and for Alleyne. Near Shotwood he
came upon five seamen, on their way from Poole to Southampton--rude
red-faced men, who shouted at him in a jargon which he could scarce
understand, and held out to him a great pot from which they had been
drinking--nor would they let him pass until he had dipped pannikin in
and taken a mouthful, which set him coughing and choking, with the tears
running down his cheeks. Further on he met a sturdy black-bearded man,
mounted on a brown horse, with a rosary in his right hand and a long
two-handed sword jangling against his stirrup-iron. By his black robe
and the eight-pointed cross upon his sleeve, Alleyne recognized him
as one of the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem, whose
presbytery was at Baddesley. He held up two fingers as he passed, with a
�_Benedic, fili mi!_� whereat Alleyne doffed hat and bent knee, looking
with much reverence at one who had devoted his life to the overthrow of
the infidel. Poor simple lad! he had not learned yet that what men are
and what men profess to be are very wide asunder, and that the Knights
of St. John, having come into large part of the riches of the ill-fated
Templars, were very much too comfortable to think of exchanging their
palace for a tent, or the cellars of England for the thirsty deserts of
Syria. Yet ignorance may be more precious than wisdom, for Alleyne as he
walked on braced himself to a higher life by the thought of this other's
sacrifice, and strengthened himself by his example which he could scarce
have done had he known that the Hospitaller's mind ran more upon malmsey
than on Mamelukes, and on venison rather than victories.

As he pressed on the plain turned to woods once more in the region of
Wilverley Walk, and a cloud swept up from the south with the sun shining
through the chinks of it. A few great drops came pattering loudly
down, and then in a moment the steady swish of a brisk shower, with
the dripping and dropping of the leaves. Alleyne, glancing round for
shelter, saw a thick and lofty holly-bush, so hollowed out beneath that
no house could have been drier. Under this canopy of green two men were
already squatted, who waved their hands to Alleyne that he should join
them. As he approached he saw that they had five dried herrings laid
out in front of them, with a great hunch of wheaten bread and a leathern
flask full of milk, but instead of setting to at their food they
appeared to have forgot all about it, and were disputing together with
flushed faces and angry gestures. It was easy to see by their dress and
manner that they were two of those wandering students who formed about
this time so enormous a multitude in every country in Europe. The one
was long and thin, with melancholy features, while the other was fat and
sleek, with a loud voice and the air of a man who is not to be gainsaid.

�Come hither, good youth,� he cried, �come hither! _Vultus ingenui
puer_. Heed not the face of my good coz here. _Foenum habet in cornu_,
as Don Horace has it; but I warrant him harmless for all that.�

�Stint your bull's bellowing!� exclaimed the other. �If it come to
Horace, I have a line in my mind: _Loquaces si sapiat_----How doth it
run? The English o't being that a man of sense should ever avoid a great
talker. That being so, if all were men of sense then thou wouldst be a
lonesome man, coz.�

�Alas! Dicon, I fear that your logic is as bad as your philosophy or
your divinity--and God wot it would be hard to say a worse word than
that for it. For, hark ye: granting, _propter argumentum_, that I am a
talker, then the true reasoning runs that since all men of sense should
avoid me, and thou hast not avoided me, but art at the present moment
eating herrings with me under a holly-bush, ergo you are no man of
sense, which is exactly what I have been dinning into your long ears
ever since I first clapped eyes on your sunken chops.�

�Tut, tut!� cried the other. �Your tongue goes like the clapper of
a mill-wheel. Sit down here, friend, and partake of this herring.
Understand first, however, that there are certain conditions attached to
it.�

�I had hoped,� said Alleyne, falling into the humor of the twain, �that
a tranchoir of bread and a draught of milk might be attached to it.�

�Hark to him, hark to him!� cried the little fat man. �It is even thus,
Dicon! Wit, lad, is a catching thing, like the itch or the sweating
sickness. I exude it round me; it is an aura. I tell you, coz, that no
man can come within seventeen feet of me without catching a spark. Look
at your own case. A duller man never stepped, and yet within the week
you have said three things which might pass, and one thing the day we
left Fordingbridge which I should not have been ashamed of myself.�

�Enough, rattle-pate, enough!� said the other. �The milk you shall have
and the bread also, friend, together with the herring, but you must hold
the scales between us.�

�If he hold the herring he holds the scales, my sapient brother,� cried
the fat man. �But I pray you, good youth, to tell us whether you are a
learned clerk, and, if so, whether you have studied at Oxenford or at
Paris.�

�I have some small stock of learning,� Alleyne answered, picking at his
herring, �but I have been at neither of these places. I was bred amongst
the Cistercian monks at Beaulieu Abbey.�

�Pooh, pooh!� they cried both together. �What sort of an upbringing is
that?�

�_Non cuivis contingit adire Corinthum_,� quoth Alleyne.

�Come, brother Stephen, he hath some tincture of letters,� said the
melancholy man more hopefully. �He may be the better judge, since he
hath no call to side with either of us. Now, attention, friend, and let
your ears work as well as your nether jaw. _Judex damnatur_--you know
the old saw. Here am I upholding the good fame of the learned Duns
Scotus against the foolish quibblings and poor silly reasonings of
Willie Ockham.�

�While I,� quoth the other loudly, �do maintain the good sense
and extraordinary wisdom of that most learned William against the
crack-brained fantasies of the muddy Scotchman, who hath hid such little
wit as he has under so vast a pile of words, that it is like one drop of
Gascony in a firkin of ditch-water. Solomon his wisdom would not suffice
to say what the rogue means.�

�Certes, Stephen Hapgood, his wisdom doth not suffice,� cried the other.
�It is as though a mole cried out against the morning star, because he
could not see it. But our dispute, friend, is concerning the nature of
that subtle essence which we call thought. For I hold with the learned
Scotus that thought is in very truth a thing, even as vapor or fumes,
or many other substances which our gross bodily eyes are blind to. For,
look you, that which produces a thing must be itself a thing, and if a
man's thought may produce a written book, then must thought itself be a
material thing, even as the book is. Have I expressed it? Do I make it
plain?�

�Whereas I hold,� shouted the other, �with my revered preceptor,
_doctor, praeclarus et excellentissimus_, that all things are but
thought; for when thought is gone I prythee where are the things then?
Here are trees about us, and I see them because I think I see them, but
if I have swooned, or sleep, or am in wine, then, my thought having gone
forth from me, lo the trees go forth also. How now, coz, have I touched
thee on the raw?�

Alleyne sat between them munching his bread, while the twain disputed
across his knees, leaning forward with flushed faces and darting
hands, in all the heat of argument. Never had he heard such jargon of
scholastic philosophy, such fine-drawn distinctions, such cross-fire of
major and minor, proposition, syllogism, attack and refutation. Question
clattered upon answer like a sword on a buckler. The ancients, the
fathers of the Church, the moderns, the Scriptures, the Arabians, were
each sent hurtling against the other, while the rain still dripped and
the dark holly-leaves glistened with the moisture. At last the fat man
seemed to weary of it, for he set to work quietly upon his meal, while
his opponent, as proud as the rooster who is left unchallenged upon the
midden, crowed away in a last long burst of quotation and deduction.
Suddenly, however, his eyes dropped upon his food, and he gave a howl of
dismay.

�You double thief!� he cried, �you have eaten my herrings, and I without
bite or sup since morning.�

�That,� quoth the other complacently, �was my final argument, my
crowning effort, or _peroratio_, as the orators have it. For, coz, since
all thoughts are things, you have but to think a pair of herrings, and
then conjure up a pottle of milk wherewith to wash them down.�

�A brave piece of reasoning,� cried the other, �and I know of but one
reply to it.� On which, leaning forward, he caught his comrade a rousing
smack across his rosy cheek. �Nay, take it not amiss,� he said, �since
all things are but thoughts, then that also is but a thought and may be
disregarded.�

This last argument, however, by no means commended itself to the pupil
of Ockham, who plucked a great stick from the ground and signified his
dissent by smiting the realist over the pate with it. By good fortune,
the wood was so light and rotten that it went to a thousand splinters,
but Alleyne thought it best to leave the twain to settle the matter at
their leisure, the more so as the sun was shining brightly once
more. Looking back down the pool-strewn road, he saw the two excited
philosophers waving their hands and shouting at each other, but their
babble soon became a mere drone in the distance, and a turn in the road
hid them from his sight.

And now after passing Holmesley Walk and the Wooton Heath, the forest
began to shred out into scattered belts of trees, with gleam of
corn-field and stretch of pasture-land between. Here and there by the
wayside stood little knots of wattle-and-daub huts with shock-haired
laborers lounging by the doors and red-cheeked children sprawling in
the roadway. Back among the groves he could see the high gable ends and
thatched roofs of the franklins' houses, on whose fields these men found
employment, or more often a thick dark column of smoke marked their
position and hinted at the coarse plenty within. By these signs Alleyne
knew that he was on the very fringe of the forest, and therefore no
great way from Christchurch. The sun was lying low in the west and
shooting its level rays across the long sweep of rich green country,
glinting on the white-fleeced sheep and throwing long shadows from the
red kine who waded knee-deep in the juicy clover. Right glad was the
traveller to see the high tower of Christchurch Priory gleaming in the
mellow evening light, and gladder still when, on rounding a corner, he
came upon his comrades of the morning seated astraddle upon a fallen
tree. They had a flat space before them, on which they alternately threw
little square pieces of bone, and were so intent upon their occupation
that they never raised eye as he approached them. He observed with
astonishment, as he drew near, that the archer's bow was on John's
back, the archer's sword by John's side, and the steel cap laid upon the
tree-trunk between them.

�Mort de ma vie!� Aylward shouted, looking down at the dice. �Never had
I such cursed luck. A murrain on the bones! I have not thrown a good
main since I left Navarre. A one and a three! En avant, camarade!�

�Four and three,� cried Hordle John, counting on his great fingers,
�that makes seven. Ho, archer, I have thy cap! Now have at thee for thy
jerkin!�

�Mon Dieu!� he growled, �I am like to reach Christchurch in my shirt.�
 Then suddenly glancing up, �Hola, by the splendor of heaven, here is our
cher petit! Now, by my ten finger bones! this is a rare sight to mine
eyes.� He sprang up and threw his arms round Alleyne's neck, while
John, no less pleased, but more backward and Saxon in his habits, stood
grinning and bobbing by the wayside, with his newly won steel cap stuck
wrong side foremost upon his tangle of red hair.

�Hast come to stop?� cried the bowman, patting Alleyne all over in his
delight. �Shall not get away from us again!�

�I wish no better,� said he, with a pringling in the eyes at this hearty
greeting.

�Well said, lad!� cried big John. �We three shall to the wars together,
and the devil may fly away with the Abbot of Beaulieu! But your feet
and hosen are all besmudged. Hast been in the water, or I am the more
mistaken.�

�I have in good sooth,� Alleyne answered, and then as they journeyed
on their way he told them the many things that had befallen him, his
meeting with the villein, his sight of the king, his coming upon his
brother, with all the tale of the black welcome and of the fair damsel.
They strode on either side, each with an ear slanting towards him, but
ere he had come to the end of his story the bowman had spun round upon
his heel, and was hastening back the way they had come, breathing loudly
through his nose.

�What then?� asked Alleyne, trotting after him and gripping at his
jerkin.

�I am back for Minstead, lad.�

�And why, in the name of sense?�

�To thrust a handful of steel into the Socman. What! hale a demoiselle
against her will, and then loose dogs at his own brother! Let me go!�

�Nenny, nenny!� cried Alleyne, laughing. �There was no scath done. Come
back, friend�--and so, by mingled pushing and entreaties, they got his
head round for Christchurch once more. Yet he walked with his chin upon
his shoulder, until, catching sight of a maiden by a wayside well, the
smiles came back to his face and peace to his heart.

�But you,� said Alleyne, �there have been changes with you also. Why
should not the workman carry his tools? Where are bow and sword and
cap--and why so warlike, John?�

�It is a game which friend Aylward hath been a-teaching of me.�

�And I found him an over-apt pupil,� grumbled the bowman. �He hath
stripped me as though I had fallen into the hands of the tardvenus. But,
by my hilt! you must render them back to me, camarade, lest you bring
discredit upon my mission, and I will pay you for them at armorers'
prices.�

�Take them back, man, and never heed the pay,� said John. �I did but
wish to learn the feel of them, since I am like to have such trinkets
hung to my own girdle for some years to come.�

�Ma foi, he was born for a free companion!� cried Aylward, �He hath the
very trick of speech and turn of thought. I take them back then, and
indeed it gives me unease not to feel my yew-stave tapping against my
leg bone. But see, mes garcons, on this side of the church rises the
square and darkling tower of Earl Salisbury's castle, and even from here
I seem to see on yonder banner the red roebuck of the Montacutes.�

�Red upon white,� said Alleyne, shading his eyes; �but whether roebuck
or no is more than I could vouch. How black is the great tower, and
how bright the gleam of arms upon the wall! See below the flag, how it
twinkles like a star!�

�Aye, it is the steel head-piece of the watchman,� remarked the archer.
�But we must on, if we are to be there before the drawbridge rises at
the vespers bugle; for it is likely that Sir Nigel, being so renowned a
soldier, may keep hard discipline within the walls, and let no man enter
after sundown.� So saying, he quickened his pace, and the three comrades
were soon close to the straggling and broad-spread town which centered
round the noble church and the frowning castle.

It chanced on that very evening that Sir Nigel Loring, having supped
before sunset, as was his custom, and having himself seen that Pommers
and Cadsand, his two war-horses, with the thirteen hacks, the five
jennets, my lady's three palfreys, and the great dapple-gray roussin,
had all their needs supplied, had taken his dogs for an evening
breather. Sixty or seventy of them, large and small, smooth and
shaggy--deer-hound, boar-hound, blood-hound, wolf-hound, mastiff, alaun,
talbot, lurcher, terrier, spaniel--snapping, yelling and whining, with
score of lolling tongues and waving tails, came surging down the narrow
lane which leads from the Twynham kennels to the bank of Avon. Two
russet-clad varlets, with loud halloo and cracking whips, walked
thigh-deep amid the swarm, guiding, controlling, and urging. Behind
came Sir Nigel himself, with Lady Loring upon his arm, the pair walking
slowly and sedately, as befitted both their age and their condition,
while they watched with a smile in their eyes the scrambling crowd in
front of them. They paused, however, at the bridge, and, leaning their
elbows upon the stonework, they stood looking down at their own faces in
the glassy stream, and at the swift flash of speckled trout against the
tawny gravel.

Sir Nigel was a slight man of poor stature, with soft lisping voice and
gentle ways. So short was he that his wife, who was no very tall woman,
had the better of him by the breadth of three fingers. His sight having
been injured in his early wars by a basketful of lime which had been
emptied over him when he led the Earl of Derby's stormers up the breach
at Bergerac, he had contracted something of a stoop, with a blinking,
peering expression of face. His age was six and forty, but the constant
practice of arms, together with a cleanly life, had preserved his
activity and endurance unimpaired, so that from a distance he seemed to
have the slight limbs and swift grace of a boy. His face, however, was
tanned of a dull yellow tint, with a leathery, poreless look, which
spoke of rough outdoor doings, and the little pointed beard which he
wore, in deference to the prevailing fashion, was streaked and shot with
gray. His features were small, delicate, and regular, with clear-cut,
curving nose, and eyes which jutted forward from the lids. His dress was
simple and yet spruce. A Flandrish hat of beevor, bearing in the band
the token of Our Lady of Embrun, was drawn low upon the left side to
hide that ear which had been partly shorn from his head by a Flemish
man-at-arms in a camp broil before Tournay. His cote-hardie, or tunic,
and trunk-hosen were of a purple plum color, with long weepers which
hung from either sleeve to below his knees. His shoes were of red
leather, daintily pointed at the toes, but not yet prolonged to the
extravagant lengths which the succeeding reign was to bring into
fashion. A gold-embroidered belt of knighthood encircled his loins, with
his arms, five roses gules on a field argent, cunningly worked upon the
clasp. So stood Sir Nigel Loring upon the bridge of Avon, and talked
lightly with his lady.

And, certes, had the two visages alone been seen, and the stranger been
asked which were the more likely to belong to the bold warrior whose
name was loved by the roughest soldiery of Europe, he had assuredly
selected the lady's. Her face was large and square and red, with fierce,
thick brows, and the eyes of one who was accustomed to rule. Taller and
broader than her husband, her flowing gown of sendall, and fur-lined
tippet, could not conceal the gaunt and ungraceful outlines of her
figure. It was the age of martial women. The deeds of black Agnes of
Dunbar, of Lady Salisbury and of the Countess of Montfort, were still
fresh in the public minds. With such examples before them the wives of
the English captains had become as warlike as their mates, and ordered
their castles in their absence with the prudence and discipline of
veteran seneschals. Right easy were the Montacutes of their Castle
of Twynham, and little had they to dread from roving galley or French
squadron, while Lady Mary Loring had the ordering of it. Yet even in
that age it was thought that, though a lady might have a soldier's
heart, it was scarce as well that she should have a soldier's face.
There were men who said that of all the stern passages and daring deeds
by which Sir Nigel Loring had proved the true temper of his courage, not
the least was his wooing and winning of so forbidding a dame.

�I tell you, my fair lord,� she was saying, �that it is no fit training
for a demoiselle: hawks and hounds, rotes and citoles singing a French
rondel, or reading the Gestes de Doon de Mayence, as I found her
yesternight, pretending sleep, the artful, with the corner of the scroll
thrusting forth from under her pillow. Lent her by Father Christopher of
the priory, forsooth--that is ever her answer. How shall all this help
her when she has castle of her own to keep, with a hundred mouths all
agape for beef and beer?�

�True, my sweet bird, true,� answered the knight, picking a comfit from
his gold drageoir. �The maid is like the young filly, which kicks heels
and plunges for very lust of life. Give her time, dame, give her time.�

�Well, I know that my father would have given me, not time, but a good
hazel-stick across my shoulders. Ma foi! I know not what the world is
coming to, when young maids may flout their elders. I wonder that you do
not correct her, my fair lord.�

�Nay, my heart's comfort, I never raised hand to woman yet, and it would
be a passing strange thing if I began on my own flesh and blood. It was
a woman's hand which cast this lime into mine eyes, and though I saw
her stoop, and might well have stopped her ere she threw, I deemed it
unworthy of my knighthood to hinder or balk one of her sex.�

�The hussy!� cried Lady Loring clenching her broad right hand. �I would
I had been at the side of her!�

�And so would I, since you would have been the nearer me my own. But
I doubt not that you are right, and that Maude's wings need clipping,
which I may leave in your hands when I am gone, for, in sooth, this
peaceful life is not for me, and were it not for your gracious kindness
and loving care I could not abide it a week. I hear that there is talk
of warlike muster at Bordeaux once more, and by St. Paul! it would be a
new thing if the lions of England and the red pile of Chandos were to
be seen in the field, and the roses of Loring were not waving by their
side.�

�Now woe worth me but I feared it!� cried she, with the color all struck
from her face. �I have noted your absent mind, your kindling eye, your
trying and riveting of old harness. Consider my sweet lord, that you
have already won much honor, that we have seen but little of each other,
that you bear upon your body the scar of over twenty wounds received
in I know not how many bloody encounters. Have you not done enough for
honor and the public cause?�

�My lady, when our liege lord, the king, at three score years, and my
Lord Chandos at three-score and ten, are blithe and ready to lay lance
in rest for England's cause, it would ill be-seem me to prate of service
done. It is sooth that I have received seven and twenty wounds. There is
the more reason that I should be thankful that I am still long of breath
and sound in limb. I have also seen some bickering and scuffling. Six
great land battles I count, with four upon sea, and seven and fifty
onfalls, skirmishes and bushments. I have held two and twenty towns,
and I have been at the intaking of thirty-one. Surely then it would
be bitter shame to me, and also to you, since my fame is yours, that I
should now hold back if a man's work is to be done. Besides, bethink
you how low is our purse, with bailiff and reeve ever croaking of empty
farms and wasting lands. Were it not for this constableship which the
Earl of Salisbury hath bestowed upon us we could scarce uphold the state
which is fitting to our degree. Therefore, my sweeting, there is the
more need that I should turn to where there is good pay to be earned and
brave ransoms to be won.�

�Ah, my dear lord,� quoth she, with sad, weary eyes. �I thought that at
last I had you to mine own self, even though your youth had been spent
afar from my side. Yet my voice, as I know well, should speed you on to
glory and renown, not hold you back when fame is to be won. Yet what can
I say, for all men know that your valor needs the curb and not the
spur. It goes to my heart that you should ride forth now a mere knight
bachelor, when there is no noble in the land who hath so good a claim to
the square pennon, save only that you have not the money to uphold it.�

�And whose fault that, my sweet bird?� said he.

�No fault, my fair lord, but a virtue: for how many rich ransoms have
you won, and yet have scattered the crowns among page and archer and
varlet, until in a week you had not as much as would buy food and
forage. It is a most knightly largesse, and yet withouten money how can
man rise?�

�Dirt and dross!� cried he.

�What matter rise or fall, so that duty be done and honor gained.
Banneret or bachelor, square pennon or forked, I would not give a denier
for the difference, and the less since Sir John Chandos, chosen flower
of English chivalry, is himself but a humble knight. But meanwhile fret
not thyself, my heart's dove, for it is like that there may be no war
waged, and we must await the news. But here are three strangers, and
one, as I take it, a soldier fresh from service. It is likely that he
may give us word of what is stirring over the water.�

Lady Loring, glancing up, saw in the fading light three companions
walking abreast down the road, all gray with dust, and stained with
travel, yet chattering merrily between themselves. He in the midst was
young and comely, with boyish open face and bright gray eyes, which
glanced from right to left as though he found the world around him both
new and pleasing. To his right walked a huge red-headed man, with
broad smile and merry twinkle, whose clothes seemed to be bursting and
splitting at every seam, as though he were some lusty chick who was
breaking bravely from his shell. On the other side, with his knotted
hand upon the young man's shoulder, came a stout and burly archer, brown
and fierce eyed, with sword at belt and long yellow yew-stave peeping
over his shoulder. Hard face, battered head piece, dinted brigandine,
with faded red lion of St. George ramping on a discolored ground, all
proclaimed as plainly as words that he was indeed from the land of war.
He looked keenly at Sir Nigel as he approached, and then, plunging his
hand under his breastplate, he stepped up to him with a rough, uncouth
bow to the lady.

�Your pardon, fair sir,� said he, �but I know you the moment I clap eyes
on you, though in sooth I have seen you oftener in steel than in velvet.
I have drawn string besides you at La Roche-d'Errien, Romorantin,
Maupertuis, Nogent, Auray, and other places.�

�Then, good archer, I am right glad to welcome you to Twynham Castle,
and in the steward's room you will find provant for yourself and
comrades. To me also your face is known, though mine eyes play such
tricks with me that I can scarce be sure of my own squire. Rest awhile,
and you shall come to the hall anon and tell us what is passing in
France, for I have heard that it is likely that our pennons may flutter
to the south of the great Spanish mountains ere another year be passed.�

�There was talk of it in Bordeaux,� answered the archer, �and I
saw myself that the armorers and smiths were as busy as rats in a
wheat-rick. But I bring you this letter from the valiant Gascon knight,
Sir Claude Latour. And to you, Lady,� he added after a pause, �I bring
from him this box of red sugar of Narbonne, with every courteous and
knightly greeting which a gallant cavalier may make to a fair and noble
dame.�

This little speech had cost the blunt bowman much pains and planning;
but he might have spared his breath, for the lady was quite as much
absorbed as her lord in the letter, which they held between them, a
hand on either corner, spelling it out very slowly, with drawn brows and
muttering lips. As they read it, Alleyne, who stood with Hordle John a
few paces back from their comrade, saw the lady catch her breath, while
the knight laughed softly to himself.

�You see, dear heart,� said he, �that they will not leave the old dog
in his kennel when the game is afoot. And what of this White Company,
archer?�

�Ah, sir, you speak of dogs,� cried Aylward; �but there are a pack
of lusty hounds who are ready for any quarry, if they have but a good
huntsman to halloo them on. Sir, we have been in the wars together, and
I have seen many a brave following but never such a set of woodland boys
as this. They do but want you at their head, and who will bar the way to
them!�

�Pardieu!� said Sir Nigel, �if they are all like their messenger, they
are indeed men of whom a leader may be proud. Your name, good archer?�

�Sam Aylward, sir, of the Hundred of Easebourne and the Rape of
Chichester.�

�And this giant behind you?�

�He is big John, of Hordle, a forest man, who hath now taken service in
the Company.�

�A proper figure of a man at-arms,� said the little knight. �Why, man,
you are no chicken, yet I warrant him the stronger man. See to that
great stone from the coping which hath fallen upon the bridge. Four of
my lazy varlets strove this day to carry it hence. I would that you two
could put them to shame by budging it, though I fear that I overtask
you, for it is of a grievous weight.�

He pointed as he spoke to a huge rough-hewn block which lay by the
roadside, deep sunken from its own weight in the reddish earth. The
archer approached it, rolling back the sleeves of his jerkin, but with
no very hopeful countenance, for indeed it was a mighty rock. John,
however, put him aside with his left hand, and, stooping over the stone,
he plucked it single-handed from its soft bed and swung it far into the
stream. There it fell with mighty splash, one jagged end peaking out
above the surface, while the waters bubbled and foamed with far-circling
eddy.

�Good lack!� cried Sir Nigel, and �Good lack!� cried his lady, while
John stood laughing and wiping the caked dirt from his fingers.

�I have felt his arms round my ribs,� said the bowman, �and they crackle
yet at the thought of it. This other comrade of mine is a right learned
clerk, for all that he is so young, hight Alleyne, the son of Edric,
brother to the Socman of Minstead.�

�Young man,� quoth Sir Nigel, sternly, �if you are of the same way of
thought as your brother, you may not pass under portcullis of mine.�

�Nay, fair sir,� cried Aylward hastily, �I will be pledge for it that
they have no thought in common; for this very day his brother hath set
his dogs upon him, and driven him from his lands.�

�And are you, too, of the White Company?� asked Sir Nigel. �Hast had
small experience of war, if I may judge by your looks and bearing.�

�I would fain to France with my friends here,� Alleyne answered; �but I
am a man of peace--a reader, exorcist, acolyte, and clerk.�

�That need not hinder,� quoth Sir Nigel.

�No, fair sir,� cried the bowman joyously. �Why, I myself have served
two terms with Arnold de Cervolles, he whom they called the archpriest.
By my hilt! I have seen him ere now, with monk's gown trussed to his
knees, over his sandals in blood in the fore-front of the battle. Yet,
ere the last string had twanged, he would be down on his four bones
among the stricken, and have them all houseled and shriven, as quick as
shelling peas. Ma foi! there were those who wished that he would have
less care for their souls and a little more for their bodies!�

�It is well to have a learned clerk in every troop,� said Sir Nigel. �By
St. Paul, there are men so caitiff that they think more of a scrivener's
pen than of their lady's smile, and do their devoir in hopes that they
may fill a line in a chronicle or make a tag to a jongleur's romance. I
remember well that, at the siege of Retters, there was a little, sleek,
fat clerk of the name of Chaucer, who was so apt at rondel, sirvente, or
tonson, that no man dare give back a foot from the walls, lest he find
it all set down in his rhymes and sung by every underling and varlet
in the camp. But, my soul's bird, you hear me prate as though all were
decided, when I have not yet taken counsel either with you or with my
lady mother. Let us to the chamber, while these strangers find such fare
as pantry and cellar may furnish.�

�The night air strikes chill,� said the lady, and turned down the road
with her hand upon her lord's arm. The three comrades dropped behind and
followed: Aylward much the lighter for having accomplished his mission,
Alleyne full of wonderment at the humble bearing of so renowned
a captain, and John loud with snorts and sneers, which spoke his
disappointment and contempt.

�What ails the man?� asked Aylward in surprise.

�I have been cozened and bejaped,� quoth he gruffly.

�By whom, Sir Samson the strong?�

�By thee, Sir Balaam the false prophet.�

�By my hilt!� cried the archer, �though I be not Balaam, yet I hold
converse with the very creature that spake to him. What is amiss, then,
and how have I played you false?�

�Why, marry, did you not say, and Alleyne here will be my witness, that,
if I would hie to the wars with you, you would place me under a leader
who was second to none in all England for valor? Yet here you bring me
to a shred of a man, peaky and ill-nourished, with eyes like a moulting
owl, who must needs, forsooth, take counsel with his mother ere he
buckle sword to girdle.�

�Is that where the shoe galls?� cried the bowman, and laughed aloud.
�I will ask you what you think of him three months hence, if we be all
alive; for sure I am that----�

Aylward's words were interrupted by an extraordinary hubbub which broke
out that instant some little way down the street in the direction of the
Priory. There was deep-mouthed shouting of men, frightened shrieks of
women, howling and barking of curs, and over all a sullen, thunderous
rumble, indescribably menacing and terrible. Round the corner of the
narrow street there came rushing a brace of whining dogs with tails
tucked under their legs, and after them a white-faced burgher, with
outstretched hands and wide-spread fingers, his hair all abristle and
his eyes glinting back from one shoulder to the other, as though some
great terror were at his very heels. �Fly, my lady, fly!� he screeched,
and whizzed past them like bolt from bow; while close behind came
lumbering a huge black bear, with red tongue lolling from his mouth, and
a broken chain jangling behind him. To right and left the folk flew for
arch and doorway. Hordle John caught up the Lady Loring as though
she had been a feather, and sprang with her into an open porch; while
Aylward, with a whirl of French oaths, plucked at his quiver and tried
to unsling his bow. Alleyne, all unnerved at so strange and unwonted a
sight, shrunk up against the wall with his eyes fixed upon the frenzied
creature, which came bounding along with ungainly speed, looking the
larger in the uncertain light, its huge jaws agape, with blood and
slaver trickling to the ground. Sir Nigel alone, unconscious to all
appearance of the universal panic, walked with unfaltering step up
the centre of the road, a silken handkerchief in one hand and his gold
comfit-box in the other. It sent the blood cold through Alleyne's veins
to see that as they came together--the man and the beast--the creature
reared up, with eyes ablaze with fear and hate, and whirled its great
paws above the knight to smite him to the earth. He, however, blinking
with puckered eyes, reached up his kerchief, and flicked the beast twice
across the snout with it. �Ah, saucy! saucy,� quoth he, with gentle
chiding; on which the bear, uncertain and puzzled, dropped its four legs
to earth again, and, waddling back, was soon swathed in ropes by the
bear-ward and a crowd of peasants who had been in close pursuit.

A scared man was the keeper; for, having chained the brute to a stake
while he drank a stoup of ale at the inn, it had been baited by stray
curs, until, in wrath and madness, it had plucked loose the chain, and
smitten or bitten all who came in its path. Most scared of all was he
to find that the creature had come nigh to harm the Lord and Lady of the
castle, who had power to place him in the stretch-neck or to have the
skin scourged from his shoulders. Yet, when he came with bowed head
and humble entreaty for forgiveness, he was met with a handful of
small silver from Sir Nigel, whose dame, however, was less charitably
disposed, being much ruffled in her dignity by the manner in which she
had been hustled from her lord's side.

As they passed through the castle gate, John plucked at Aylward's
sleeve, and the two fell behind.

�I must crave your pardon, comrade,� said he, bluntly. �I was a fool not
to know that a little rooster may be the gamest. I believe that this man
is indeed a leader whom we may follow.�



CHAPTER XI. HOW A YOUNG SHEPHERD HAD A PERILOUS FLOCK.


Black was the mouth of Twynham Castle, though a pair of torches burning
at the further end of the gateway cast a red glare over the outer
bailey, and sent a dim, ruddy flicker through the rough-hewn arch,
rising and falling with fitful brightness. Over the door the travellers
could discern the escutcheon of the Montacutes, a roebuck gules on a
field argent, flanked on either side by smaller shields which bore the
red roses of the veteran constable. As they passed over the drawbridge,
Alleyne marked the gleam of arms in the embrasures to right and left,
and they had scarce set foot upon the causeway ere a hoarse blare
burst from a bugle, and, with screech of hinge and clank of chain, the
ponderous bridge swung up into the air, drawn by unseen hands. At the
same instant the huge portcullis came rattling down from above, and shut
off the last fading light of day. Sir Nigel and his lady walked on in
deep talk, while a fat under-steward took charge of the three comrades,
and led them to the buttery, where beef, bread, and beer were kept ever
in readiness for the wayfarer. After a hearty meal and a dip in the
trough to wash the dust from them, they strolled forth into the bailey,
where the bowman peered about through the darkness at wall and at keep,
with the carping eyes of one who has seen something of sieges, and is
not likely to be satisfied. To Alleyne and to John, however, it appeared
to be as great and as stout a fortress as could be built by the hands of
man.

Erected by Sir Balwin de Redvers in the old fighting days of the twelfth
century, when men thought much of war and little of comfort, Castle
Twynham had been designed as a stronghold pure and simple, unlike those
later and more magnificent structures where warlike strength had been
combined with the magnificence of a palace. From the time of the Edwards
such buildings as Conway or Caernarvon castles, to say nothing of Royal
Windsor, had shown that it was possible to secure luxury in peace as
well as security in times of trouble. Sir Nigel's trust, however, still
frowned above the smooth-flowing waters of the Avon, very much as the
stern race of early Anglo-Normans had designed it. There were the broad
outer and inner bailies, not paved, but sown with grass to nourish the
sheep and cattle which might be driven in on sign of danger. All round
were high and turreted walls, with at the corner a bare square-faced
keep, gaunt and windowless, rearing up from a lofty mound, which made it
almost inaccessible to an assailant. Against the bailey-walls were rows
of frail wooden houses and leaning sheds, which gave shelter to the
archers and men-at-arms who formed the garrison. The doors of these
humble dwellings were mostly open, and against the yellow glare from
within Alleyne could see the bearded fellows cleaning their harness,
while their wives would come out for a gossip, with their needlework in
their hands, and their long black shadows streaming across the yard.
The air was full of the clack of their voices and the merry prattling of
children, in strange contrast to the flash of arms and constant warlike
challenge from the walls above.

�Methinks a company of school lads could hold this place against an
army,� quoth John.

�And so say I,� said Alleyne.

�Nay, there you are wide of the clout,� the bowman said gravely. �By my
hilt! I have seen a stronger fortalice carried in a summer evening.
I remember such a one in Picardy, with a name as long as a Gascon's
pedigree. It was when I served under Sir Robert Knolles, before the days
of the Company; and we came by good plunder at the sacking of it. I had
myself a great silver bowl, with two goblets, and a plastron of Spanish
steel. Pasques Dieu! there are some fine women over yonder! Mort de ma
vie! see to that one in the doorway! I will go speak to her. But whom
have we here?�

�Is there an archer here hight Sam Aylward?� asked a gaunt man-at-arms,
clanking up to them across the courtyard.

�My name, friend,� quoth the bowman.

�Then sure I have no need to tell thee mine,� said the other.

�By the rood! if it is not Black Simon of Norwich!� cried Aylward. �A
mon coeur, camarade, a mon coeur! Ah, but I am blithe to see thee!� The
two fell upon each other and hugged like bears.

�And where from, old blood and bones?� asked the bowman.

�I am in service here. Tell me, comrade, is it sooth that we shall have
another fling at these Frenchmen? It is so rumored in the guard-room,
and that Sir Nigel will take the field once more.�

�It is like enough, mon gar., as things go.�

�Now may the Lord be praised!� cried the other. �This very night will I
set apart a golden ouche to be offered on the shrine of my name-saint. I
have pined for this, Aylward, as a young maid pines for her lover.�

�Art so set on plunder then? Is the purse so light that there is not
enough for a rouse? I have a bag at my belt, camarade, and you have but
to put your fist into it for what you want. It was ever share and share
between us.�

�Nay, friend, it is not the Frenchman's gold, but the Frenchman's blood
that I would have. I should not rest quiet in the grave, coz, if I had
not another turn at them. For with us in France it has ever been fair
and honest war--a shut fist for the man, but a bended knee for the
woman. But how was it at Winchelsea when their galleys came down upon it
some few years back? I had an old mother there, lad, who had come down
thither from the Midlands to be the nearer her son. They found her
afterwards by her own hearthstone, thrust through by a Frenchman's bill.
My second sister, my brother's wife, and her two children, they were but
ash-heaps in the smoking ruins of their house. I will not say that we
have not wrought great scath upon France, but women and children have
been safe from us. And so, old friend, my heart is hot within me, and I
long to hear the old battle-cry again, and, by God's truth! if Sir
Nigel unfurls his pennon, here is one who will be right glad to feel the
saddle-flaps under his knees.�

�We have seen good work together, old war-dog,� quoth Aylward; �and,
by my hilt! we may hope to see more ere we die. But we are more like to
hawk at the Spanish woodcock than at the French heron, though certes
it is rumored that Du Guesclin with all the best lances of France have
taken service under the lions and towers of Castile. But, comrade, it is
in my mind that there is some small matter of dispute still open between
us.�

�'Fore God, it is sooth!� cried the other; �I had forgot it. The
provost-marshal and his men tore us apart when last we met.�

�On which, friend, we vowed that we should settle the point when next we
came together. Hast thy sword, I see, and the moon throws glimmer enough
for such old night-birds as we. On guard, mon gar.! I have not heard
clink of steel this month or more.�

�Out from the shadow then,� said the other, drawing his sword. �A vow is
a vow, and not lightly to be broken.�

�A vow to the saints,� cried Alleyne, �is indeed not to be set aside;
but this is a devil's vow, and, simple clerk as I am, I am yet the
mouthpiece of the true church when I say that it were mortal sin to
fight on such a quarrel. What! shall two grown men carry malice for
years, and fly like snarling curs at each other's throats?�

�No malice, my young clerk, no malice,� quoth Black Simon. �I have not
a bitter drop in my heart for mine old comrade; but the quarrel, as he
hath told you, is still open and unsettled. Fall on, Aylward!�

�Not whilst I can stand between you,� cried Alleyne, springing before
the bowman. �It is shame and sin to see two Christian Englishmen turn
swords against each other like the frenzied bloodthirsty paynim.�

�And, what is more,� said Hordle John, suddenly appearing out of the
buttery with the huge board upon which the pastry was rolled, �if either
raise sword I shall flatten him like a Shrovetide pancake. By the black
rood! I shall drive him into the earth, like a nail into a door, rather
than see you do scath to each other.�

�'Fore God, this is a strange way of preaching peace,� cried Black
Simon. �You may find the scath yourself, my lusty friend, if you raise
your great cudgel to me. I had as lief have the castle drawbridge drop
upon my pate.�

�Tell me, Aylward,� said Alleyne earnestly, with his hands outstretched
to keep the pair asunder, �what is the cause of quarrel, that we may see
whether honorable settlement may not be arrived at?�

The bowman looked down at his feet and then up at the moon. �Parbleu!�
 he cried, �the cause of quarrel? Why, mon petit, it was years ago in
Limousin, and how can I bear in mind what was the cause of it? Simon
there hath it at the end of his tongue.�

�Not I, in troth,� replied the other; �I have had other things to think
of. There was some sort of bickering over dice, or wine, or was it a
woman, coz?�

�Pasques Dieu! but you have nicked it,� cried Aylward. �It was indeed
about a woman; and the quarrel must go forward, for I am still of the
same mind as before.�

�What of the woman, then?� asked Simon. �May the murrain strike me if I
can call to mind aught about her.�

�It was La Blanche Rose, maid at the sign of the 'Trois Corbeaux' at
Limoges. Bless her pretty heart! Why, mon gar., I loved her.�

�So did a many,� quoth Simon. �I call her to mind now. On the very day
that we fought over the little hussy, she went off with Evan ap Price,
a long-legged Welsh dagsman. They have a hostel of their own now,
somewhere on the banks of the Garonne, where the landlord drinks so much
of the liquor that there is little left for the customers.�

�So ends our quarrel, then,� said Aylward, sheathing his sword. �A Welsh
dagsman, i' faith! C'etait mauvais gout, camarade, and the more so when
she had a jolly archer and a lusty man-at-arms to choose from.�

�True, old lad. And it is as well that we can compose our differences
honorably, for Sir Nigel had been out at the first clash of steel; and
he hath sworn that if there be quarrelling in the garrison he would
smite the right hand from the broilers. You know him of old, and that he
is like to be as good as his word.�

�Mort-Dieu! yes. But there are ale, mead, and wine in the buttery, and
the steward a merry rogue, who will not haggle over a quart or two.
Buvons, mon gar., for it is not every day that two old friends come
together.�

The old soldiers and Hordle John strode off together in all good
fellowship. Alleyne had turned to follow them, when he felt a touch upon
his shoulder, and found a young page by his side.

�The Lord Loring commands,� said the boy, �that you will follow me to
the great chamber, and await him there.�

�But my comrades?�

�His commands were for you alone.�

Alleyne followed the messenger to the east end of the courtyard, where a
broad flight of steps led up to the doorway of the main hall, the outer
wall of which is washed by the waters of the Avon. As designed at first,
no dwelling had been allotted to the lord of the castle and his family
but the dark and dismal basement story of the keep. A more civilized or
more effeminate generation, however, had refused to be pent up in such
a cellar, and the hall with its neighboring chambers had been added for
their accommodation. Up the broad steps Alleyne went, still following
his boyish guide, until at the folding oak doors the latter paused, and
ushered him into the main hall of the castle.

On entering the room the clerk looked round; but, seeing no one, he
continued to stand, his cap in his hand, examining with the greatest
interest a chamber which was so different to any to which he was
accustomed. The days had gone by when a nobleman's hall was but a
barn-like, rush-strewn enclosure, the common lounge and eating-room of
every inmate of the castle. The Crusaders had brought back with them
experiences of domestic luxuries, of Damascus carpets and rugs of
Aleppo, which made them impatient of the hideous bareness and want of
privacy which they found in their ancestral strongholds. Still stronger,
however, had been the influence of the great French war; for, however
well matched the nations might be in martial exercises, there could be
no question but that our neighbors were infinitely superior to us in the
arts of peace. A stream of returning knights, of wounded soldiers,
and of unransomed French noblemen, had been for a quarter of a century
continually pouring into England, every one of whom exerted an influence
in the direction of greater domestic refinement, while shiploads of
French furniture from Calais, Rouen, and other plundered towns, had
supplied our own artisans with models on which to shape their work.
Hence, in most English castles, and in Castle Twynham among the rest,
chambers were to be found which would seem to be not wanting either in
beauty or in comfort.

In the great stone fireplace a log fire was spurting and crackling,
throwing out a ruddy glare which, with the four bracket-lamps which
stood at each corner of the room, gave a bright and lightsome air to the
whole apartment. Above was a wreath-work of blazonry, extending up to
the carved and corniced oaken roof; while on either side stood the high
canopied chairs placed for the master of the house and for his most
honored guest. The walls were hung all round with most elaborate and
brightly colored tapestry, representing the achievements of Sir Bevis
of Hampton, and behind this convenient screen were stored the tables
dormant and benches which would be needed for banquet or high festivity.
The floor was of polished tiles, with a square of red and black diapered
Flemish carpet in the centre; and many settees, cushions, folding
chairs, and carved bancals littered all over it. At the further end was
a long black buffet or dresser, thickly covered with gold cups, silver
salvers, and other such valuables. All this Alleyne examined with
curious eyes; but most interesting of all to him was a small ebony
table at his very side, on which, by the side of a chess-board and the
scattered chessmen, there lay an open manuscript written in a right
clerkly hand, and set forth with brave flourishes and devices along the
margins. In vain Alleyne bethought him of where he was, and of those
laws of good breeding and decorum which should restrain him: those
colored capitals and black even lines drew his hand down to them, as
the loadstone draws the needle, until, almost before he knew it, he
was standing with the romance of Garin de Montglane before his eyes, so
absorbed in its contents as to be completely oblivious both of where he
was and why he had come there.

He was brought back to himself, however, by a sudden little ripple of
quick feminine laughter. Aghast, he dropped the manuscript among the
chessmen and stared in bewilderment round the room. It was as empty and
as still as ever. Again he stretched his hand out to the romance, and
again came that roguish burst of merriment. He looked up at the ceiling,
back at the closed door, and round at the stiff folds of motionless
tapestry. Of a sudden, however, he caught a quick shimmer from the
corner of a high-backed bancal in front of him, and, shifting a pace
or two to the side, saw a white slender hand, which held a mirror of
polished silver in such a way that the concealed observer could see
without being seen. He stood irresolute, uncertain whether to advance or
to take no notice; but, even as he hesitated, the mirror was whipped
in, and a tall and stately young lady swept out from behind the oaken
screen, with a dancing light of mischief in her eyes. Alleyne started
with astonishment as he recognized the very maiden who had suffered
from his brother's violence in the forest. She no longer wore her gay
riding-dress, however, but was attired in a long sweeping robe of black
velvet of Bruges, with delicate tracery of white lace at neck and at
wrist, scarce to be seen against her ivory skin. Beautiful as she had
seemed to him before, the lithe charm of her figure and the proud, free
grace of her bearing were enhanced now by the rich simplicity of her
attire.

�Ah, you start,� said she, with the same sidelong look of mischief,
�and I cannot marvel at it. Didst not look to see the distressed damosel
again. Oh that I were a minstrel, that I might put it into rhyme,
with the whole romance--the luckless maid, the wicked socman, and the
virtuous clerk! So might our fame have gone down together for all time,
and you be numbered with Sir Percival or Sir Galahad, or all the other
rescuers of oppressed ladies.�

�What I did,� said Alleyne, �was too small a thing for thanks; and yet,
if I may say it without offence, it was too grave and near a matter
for mirth and raillery. I had counted on my brother's love, but God has
willed that it should be otherwise. It is a joy to me to see you again,
lady, and to know that you have reached home in safety, if this be
indeed your home.�

�Yes, in sooth, Castle Twynham is my home, and Sir Nigel Loring my
father. I should have told you so this morning, but you said that you
were coming thither, so I bethought me that I might hold it back as
a surprise to you. Oh dear, but it was brave to see you!� she cried,
bursting out a-laughing once more, and standing with her hand pressed to
her side, and her half-closed eyes twinkling with amusement. �You drew
back and came forward with your eyes upon my book there, like the mouse
who sniffs the cheese and yet dreads the trap.�

�I take shame,� said Alleyne, �that I should have touched it.�

�Nay, it warmed my very heart to see it. So glad was I, that I laughed
for very pleasure. My fine preacher can himself be tempted then, thought
I; he is not made of another clay to the rest of us.�

�God help me! I am the weakest of the weak,� groaned Alleyne. �I pray
that I may have more strength.�

�And to what end?� she asked sharply. �If you are, as I understand, to
shut yourself forever in your cell within the four walls of an abbey,
then of what use would it be were your prayer to be answered?�

�The use of my own salvation.�

She turned from him with a pretty shrug and wave. �Is that all?� she
said. �Then you are no better than Father Christopher and the rest of
them. Your own, your own, ever your own! My father is the king's man,
and when he rides into the press of fight he is not thinking ever of the
saving of his own poor body; he recks little enough if he leave it on
the field. Why then should you, who are soldiers of the Spirit, be
ever moping or hiding in cell or in cave, with minds full of your own
concerns, while the world, which you should be mending, is going on its
way, and neither sees nor hears you? Were ye all as thoughtless of your
own souls as the soldier is of his body, ye would be of more avail to
the souls of others.�

�There is sooth in what you say, lady,� Alleyne answered; �and yet I
scarce can see what you would have the clergy and the church to do.�

�I would have them live as others and do men's work in the world,
preaching by their lives rather than their words. I would have them come
forth from their lonely places, mix with the borel folks, feel the pains
and the pleasures, the cares and the rewards, the temptings and the
stirrings of the common people. Let them toil and swinken, and labor,
and plough the land, and take wives to themselves----�

�Alas! alas!� cried Alleyne aghast, �you have surely sucked this poison
from the man Wicliffe, of whom I have heard such evil things.�

�Nay, I know him not. I have learned it by looking from my own chamber
window and marking these poor monks of the priory, their weary life,
their profitless round. I have asked myself if the best which can be
done with virtue is to shut it within high walls as though it were some
savage creature. If the good will lock themselves up, and if the wicked
will still wander free, then alas for the world!�

Alleyne looked at her in astonishment, for her cheek was flushed, her
eyes gleaming, and her whole pose full of eloquence and conviction. Yet
in an instant she had changed again to her old expression of merriment
leavened with mischief.

�Wilt do what I ask?� said she.

�What is it, lady?�

�Oh, most ungallant clerk! A true knight would never have asked, but
would have vowed upon the instant. 'Tis but to bear me out in what I say
to my father.�

�In what?�

�In saying, if he ask, that it was south of the Christchurch road that I
met you. I shall be shut up with the tire-women else, and have a week
of spindle and bodkin, when I would fain be galloping Troubadour up
Wilverley Walk, or loosing little Roland at the Vinney Ridge herons.�

�I shall not answer him if he ask.�

�Not answer! But he will have an answer. Nay, but you must not fail me,
or it will go ill with me.�

�But, lady,� cried poor Alleyne in great distress, �how can I say that
it was to the south of the road when I know well that it was four miles
to the north.�

�You will not say it?�

�Surely you will not, too, when you know that it is not so?�

�Oh, I weary of your preaching!� she cried, and swept away with a toss
of her beautiful head, leaving Alleyne as cast down and ashamed as
though he had himself proposed some infamous thing. She was back again
in an instant, however, in another of her varying moods.

�Look at that, my friend!� said she. �If you had been shut up in abbey
or in cell this day you could not have taught a wayward maiden to abide
by the truth. Is it not so? What avail is the shepherd if he leaves his
sheep.�

�A sorry shepherd!� said Alleyne humbly. �But here is your noble
father.�

�And you shall see how worthy a pupil I am. Father, I am much beholden
to this young clerk, who was of service to me and helped me this very
morning in Minstead Woods, four miles to the north of the Christchurch
road, where I had no call to be, you having ordered it otherwise.� All
this she reeled off in a loud voice, and then glanced with sidelong,
questioning eyes at Alleyne for his approval.

Sir Nigel, who had entered the room with a silvery-haired old lady upon
his arm, stared aghast at this sudden outburst of candor.

�Maude, Maude!� said he, shaking his head, �it is more hard for me to
gain obedience from you than from the ten score drunken archers who
followed me to Guienne. Yet, hush! little one, for your fair lady-mother
will be here anon, and there is no need that she should know it. We will
keep you from the provost-marshal this journey. Away to your chamber,
sweeting, and keep a blithe face, for she who confesses is shriven. And
now, fair mother,� he continued, when his daughter had gone, �sit
you here by the fire, for your blood runs colder than it did. Alleyne
Edricson, I would have a word with you, for I would fain that you should
take service under me. And here in good time comes my lady, without
whose counsel it is not my wont to decide aught of import; but, indeed,
it was her own thought that you should come.�

�For I have formed a good opinion of you, and can see that you are one
who may be trusted,� said the Lady Loring. �And in good sooth my dear
lord hath need of such a one by his side, for he recks so little of
himself that there should be one there to look to his needs and meet his
wants. You have seen the cloisters; it were well that you should see the
world too, ere you make choice for life between them.�

�It was for that very reason that my father willed that I should come
forth into the world at my twentieth year,� said Alleyne.

�Then your father was a man of good counsel,� said she, �and you cannot
carry out his will better than by going on this path, where all that is
noble and gallant in England will be your companions.�

�You can ride?� asked Sir Nigel, looking at the youth with puckered
eyes.

�Yes, I have ridden much at the abbey.�

�Yet there is a difference betwixt a friar's hack and a warrior's
destrier. You can sing and play?�

�On citole, flute and rebeck.�

�Good! You can read blazonry?�

�Indifferent well.�

�Then read this,� quoth Sir Nigel, pointing upwards to one of the many
quarterings which adorned the wall over the fireplace.

�Argent,� Alleyne answered, �a fess azure charged with three lozenges
dividing three mullets sable. Over all, on an escutcheon of the first, a
jambe gules.�

�A jambe gules erased,� said Sir Nigel, shaking his head solemnly. �Yet
it is not amiss for a monk-bred man. I trust that you are lowly and
serviceable?�

�I have served all my life, my lord.�

�Canst carve too?�

�I have carved two days a week for the brethren.�

�A model truly! Wilt make a squire of squires. But tell me, I pray,
canst curl hair?�

�No, my lord, but I could learn.�

�It is of import,� said he, �for I love to keep my hair well ordered,
seeing that the weight of my helmet for thirty years hath in some degree
frayed it upon the top.� He pulled off his velvet cap of maintenance as
he spoke, and displayed a pate which was as bald as an egg, and shone
bravely in the firelight. �You see,� said he, whisking round, and
showing one little strip where a line of scattered hairs, like the last
survivors in some fatal field, still barely held their own against the
fate which had fallen upon their comrades; �these locks need some little
oiling and curling, for I doubt not that if you look slantwise at my
head, when the light is good, you will yourself perceive that there are
places where the hair is sparse.�

�It is for you also to bear the purse,� said the lady; �for my sweet
lord is of so free and gracious a temper that he would give it gayly to
the first who asked alms of him. All these things, with some knowledge
of venerie, and of the management of horse, hawk and hound, with the
grace and hardihood and courtesy which are proper to your age, will make
you a fit squire for Sir Nigel Loring.�

�Alas! lady,� Alleyne answered, �I know well the great honor that you
have done me in deeming me worthy to wait upon so renowned a knight,
yet I am so conscious of my own weakness that I scarce dare incur duties
which I might be so ill-fitted to fulfil.�

�Modesty and a humble mind,� said she, �are the very first and rarest
gifts in page or squire. Your words prove that you have these, and
all the rest is but the work of use and time. But there is no call for
haste. Rest upon it for the night, and let your orisons ask for guidance
in the matter. We knew your father well, and would fain help his son,
though we have small cause to love your brother the Socman, who is
forever stirring up strife in the county.�

�We can scarce hope,� said Nigel, �to have all ready for our start before
the feast of St. Luke, for there is much to be done in the time. You
will have leisure, therefore, if it please you to take service under me,
in which to learn your devoir. Bertrand, my daughter's page, is hot to
go; but in sooth he is over young for such rough work as may be before
us.�

�And I have one favor to crave from you,� added the lady of the castle,
as Alleyne turned to leave their presence. �You have, as I understand,
much learning which you have acquired at Beaulieu.�

�Little enough, lady, compared with those who were my teachers.�

�Yet enough for my purpose, I doubt not. For I would have you give
an hour or two a day whilst you are with us in discoursing with my
daughter, the Lady Maude; for she is somewhat backward, I fear, and hath
no love for letters, save for these poor fond romances, which do but
fill her empty head with dreams of enchanted maidens and of errant
cavaliers. Father Christopher comes over after nones from the priory,
but he is stricken with years and slow of speech, so that she gets small
profit from his teaching. I would have you do what you can with her, and
with Agatha my young tire-woman, and with Dorothy Pierpont.�

And so Alleyne found himself not only chosen as squire to a knight but
also as squire to three damosels, which was even further from the part
which he had thought to play in the world. Yet he could but agree to
do what he might, and so went forth from the castle hall with his
face flushed and his head in a whirl at the thought of the strange and
perilous paths which his feet were destined to tread.



CHAPTER XII. HOW ALLEYNE LEARNED MORE THAN HE COULD TEACH.


And now there came a time of stir and bustle, of furbishing of arms and
clang of hammer from all the southland counties. Fast spread the tidings
from thorpe to thorpe and from castle to castle, that the old game was
afoot once more, and the lions and lilies to be in the field with the
early spring. Great news this for that fierce old country, whose trade
for a generation had been war, her exports archers and her imports
prisoners. For six years her sons had chafed under an unwonted peace.
Now they flew to their arms as to their birthright. The old soldiers of
Crecy, of Nogent, and of Poictiers were glad to think that they might
hear the war-trumpet once more, and gladder still were the hot youth who
had chafed for years under the martial tales of their sires. To pierce
the great mountains of the south, to fight the tamers of the fiery
Moors, to follow the greatest captain of the age, to find sunny
cornfields and vineyards, when the marches of Picardy and Normandy were
as rare and bleak as the Jedburgh forests--here was a golden prospect
for a race of warriors. From sea to sea there was stringing of bows in
the cottage and clang of steel in the castle.

Nor did it take long for every stronghold to pour forth its cavalry, and
every hamlet its footmen. Through the late autumn and the early winter
every road and country lane resounded with nakir and trumpet, with the
neigh of the war-horse and the clatter of marching men. From the Wrekin
in the Welsh marches to the Cotswolds in the west or Butser in the
south, there was no hill-top from which the peasant might not have seen
the bright shimmer of arms, the toss and flutter of plume and of pensil.
From bye-path, from woodland clearing, or from winding moor-side track
these little rivulets of steel united in the larger roads to form a
broader stream, growing ever fuller and larger as it approached the
nearest or most commodious seaport. And there all day, and day after
day, there was bustle and crowding and labor, while the great ships
loaded up, and one after the other spread their white pinions and darted
off to the open sea, amid the clash of cymbals and rolling of drums and
lusty shouts of those who went and of those who waited. From Orwell to
the Dart there was no port which did not send forth its little fleet,
gay with streamer and bunting, as for a joyous festival. Thus in the
season of the waning days the might of England put forth on to the
waters.

In the ancient and populous county of Hampshire there was no lack of
leaders or of soldiers for a service which promised either honor or
profit. In the north the Saracen's head of the Brocas and the scarlet
fish of the De Roches were waving over a strong body of archers from
Holt, Woolmer, and Harewood forests. De Borhunte was up in the east, and
Sir John de Montague in the west. Sir Luke de Ponynges, Sir Thomas West,
Sir Maurice de Bruin, Sir Arthur Lipscombe, Sir Walter Ramsey, and stout
Sir Oliver Buttesthorn were all marching south with levies from Andover,
Arlesford, Odiham and Winchester, while from Sussex came Sir John
Clinton, Sir Thomas Cheyne, and Sir John Fallislee, with a troop of
picked men-at-arms, making for their port at Southampton. Greatest of
all the musters, however, was that of Twynham Castle, for the name and
the fame of Sir Nigel Loring drew towards him the keenest and boldest
spirits, all eager to serve under so valiant a leader. Archers from the
New Forest and the Forest of Bere, billmen from the pleasant country
which is watered by the Stour, the Avon, and the Itchen, young cavaliers
from the ancient Hampshire houses, all were pushing for Christchurch to
take service under the banner of the five scarlet roses.

And now, could Sir Nigel have shown the bachelles of land which the laws
of rank required, he might well have cut his forked pennon into a
square banner, and taken such a following into the field as would have
supported the dignity of a banneret. But poverty was heavy upon him, his
land was scant, his coffers empty, and the very castle which covered him
the holding of another. Sore was his heart when he saw rare bowmen and
war-hardened spearmen turned away from his gates, for the lack of the
money which might equip and pay them. Yet the letter which Aylward had
brought him gave him powers which he was not slow to use. In it Sir
Claude Latour, the Gascon lieutenant of the White Company, assured him
that there remained in his keeping enough to fit out a hundred archers
and twenty men-at-arms, which, joined to the three hundred veteran
companions already in France, would make a force which any leader might
be proud to command. Carefully and sagaciously the veteran knight chose
out his men from the swarm of volunteers. Many an anxious consultation
he held with Black Simon, Sam Aylward, and other of his more experienced
followers, as to who should come and who should stay. By All Saints'
day, however ere the last leaves had fluttered to earth in the Wilverley
and Holmesley glades, he had filled up his full numbers, and mustered
under his banner as stout a following of Hampshire foresters as ever
twanged their war-bows. Twenty men-at-arms, too, well mounted and
equipped, formed the cavalry of the party, while young Peter Terlake of
Fareham, and Walter Ford of Botley, the martial sons of martial sires,
came at their own cost to wait upon Sir Nigel and to share with Alleyne
Edricson the duties of his squireship.

Yet, even after the enrolment, there was much to be done ere the party
could proceed upon its way. For armor, swords, and lances, there was no
need to take much forethought, for they were to be had both better and
cheaper in Bordeaux than in England. With the long-bow, however, it was
different. Yew staves indeed might be got in Spain, but it was well to
take enough and to spare with them. Then three spare cords should be
carried for each bow, with a great store of arrow-heads, besides the
brigandines of chain mail, the wadded steel caps, and the brassarts or
arm-guards, which were the proper equipment of the archer. Above all,
the women for miles round were hard at work cutting the white surcoats
which were the badge of the Company, and adorning them with the red lion
of St. George upon the centre of the breast. When all was completed and
the muster called in the castle yard the oldest soldier of the French
wars was fain to confess that he had never looked upon a better equipped
or more warlike body of men, from the old knight with his silk jupon,
sitting his great black war-horse in the front of them, to Hordle John,
the giant recruit, who leaned carelessly upon a huge black bow-stave in
the rear. Of the six score, fully half had seen service before, while a
fair sprinkling were men who had followed the wars all their lives, and
had a hand in those battles which had made the whole world ring with the
fame and the wonder of the island infantry.

Six long weeks were taken in these preparations, and it was close on
Martinmas ere all was ready for a start. Nigh two months had Alleyne
Edricson been in Castle Twynham--months which were fated to turn the
whole current of his life, to divert it from that dark and lonely bourne
towards which it tended, and to guide it into freer and more sunlit
channels. Already he had learned to bless his father for that wise
provision which had made him seek to know the world ere he had ventured
to renounce it.

For it was a different place from that which he had pictured--very
different from that which he had heard described when the master of the
novices held forth to his charges upon the ravening wolves who lurked
for them beyond the peaceful folds of Beaulieu. There was cruelty in it,
doubtless, and lust and sin and sorrow; but were there not virtues to
atone, robust positive virtues which did not shrink from temptation,
which held their own in all the rough blasts of the work-a-day world?
How colorless by contrast appeared the sinlessness which came from
inability to sin, the conquest which was attained by flying from the
enemy! Monk-bred as he was, Alleyne had native shrewdness and a mind
which was young enough to form new conclusions and to outgrow old
ones. He could not fail to see that the men with whom he was thrown in
contact, rough-tongued, fierce and quarrelsome as they were, were yet of
deeper nature and of more service in the world than the ox-eyed brethren
who rose and ate and slept from year's end to year's end in their own
narrow, stagnant circle of existence. Abbot Berghersh was a good man,
but how was he better than this kindly knight, who lived as simple a
life, held as lofty and inflexible an ideal of duty, and did with all
his fearless heart whatever came to his hand to do? In turning from the
service of the one to that of the other, Alleyne could not feel that
he was lowering his aims in life. True that his gentle and thoughtful
nature recoiled from the grim work of war, yet in those days of martial
orders and militant brotherhoods there was no gulf fixed betwixt the
priest and the soldier. The man of God and the man of the sword might
without scandal be united in the same individual. Why then should he,
a mere clerk, have scruples when so fair a chance lay in his way of
carrying out the spirit as well as the letter of his father's provision.
Much struggle it cost him, anxious spirit-questionings and midnight
prayings, with many a doubt and a misgiving; but the issue was that ere
he had been three days in Castle Twynham he had taken service under Sir
Nigel, and had accepted horse and harness, the same to be paid for out
of his share of the profits of the expedition. Henceforth for seven
hours a day he strove in the tilt-yard to qualify himself to be a worthy
squire to so worthy a knight. Young, supple and active, with all the
pent energies from years of pure and healthy living, it was not long
before he could manage his horse and his weapon well enough to earn
an approving nod from critical men-at-arms, or to hold his own against
Terlake and Ford, his fellow-servitors.

But were there no other considerations which swayed him from the
cloisters towards the world? So complex is the human spirit that it can
itself scarce discern the deep springs which impel it to action. Yet
to Alleyne had been opened now a side of life of which he had been as
innocent as a child, but one which was of such deep import that it could
not fail to influence him in choosing his path. A woman, in monkish
precepts, had been the embodiment and concentration of what was
dangerous and evil--a focus whence spread all that was to be dreaded and
avoided. So defiling was their presence that a true Cistercian might
not raise his eyes to their face or touch their finger-tips under ban of
church and fear of deadly sin. Yet here, day after day for an hour
after nones, and for an hour before vespers, he found himself in close
communion with three maidens, all young, all fair, and all therefore
doubly dangerous from the monkish standpoint. Yet he found that in their
presence he was conscious of a quick sympathy, a pleasant ease, a ready
response to all that was most gentle and best in himself, which filled
his soul with a vague and new-found joy.

And yet the Lady Maude Loring was no easy pupil to handle. An older and
more world-wise man might have been puzzled by her varying moods, her
sudden prejudices, her quick resentment at all constraint and authority.
Did a subject interest her, was there space in it for either romance
or imagination, she would fly through it with her subtle, active mind,
leaving her two fellow-students and even her teacher toiling behind her.
On the other hand, were there dull patience needed with steady toil and
strain of memory, no single fact could by any driving be fixed in her
mind. Alleyne might talk to her of the stories of old gods and heroes,
of gallant deeds and lofty aims, or he might hold forth upon moon and
stars, and let his fancy wander over the hidden secrets of the universe,
and he would have a rapt listener with flushed cheeks and eloquent eyes,
who could repeat after him the very words which had fallen from his
lips. But when it came to almagest and astrolabe, the counting of
figures and reckoning of epicycles, away would go her thoughts to horse
and hound, and a vacant eye and listless face would warn the teacher
that he had lost his hold upon his scholar. Then he had but to bring out
the old romance book from the priory, with befingered cover of sheepskin
and gold letters upon a purple ground, to entice her wayward mind back
to the paths of learning.

At times, too, when the wild fit was upon her, she would break into
pertness and rebel openly against Alleyne's gentle firmness. Yet he
would jog quietly on with his teachings, taking no heed to her mutiny,
until suddenly she would be conquered by his patience, and break into
self-revilings a hundred times stronger than her fault demanded. It
chanced however that, on one of these mornings when the evil mood was
upon her, Agatha the young tire-woman, thinking to please her mistress,
began also to toss her head and make tart rejoinder to the teacher's
questions. In an instant the Lady Maude had turned upon her two blazing
eyes and a face which was blanched with anger.

�You would dare!� said she. �You would dare!� The frightened tire-woman
tried to excuse herself. �But my fair lady,� she stammered, �what have I
done? I have said no more than I heard.�

�You would dare!� repeated the lady in a choking voice. �You, a
graceless baggage, a foolish lack-brain, with no thought above the
hemming of shifts. And he so kindly and hendy and long-suffering! You
would--ha, you may well flee the room!�

She had spoken with a rising voice, and a clasping and opening of her
long white fingers, so that it was no marvel that ere the speech was
over the skirts of Agatha were whisking round the door and the click of
her sobs to be heard dying swiftly away down the corridor.

Alleyne stared open-eyed at this tigress who had sprung so suddenly
to his rescue. �There is no need for such anger,� he said mildly. �The
maid's words have done me no scath. It is you yourself who have erred.�

�I know it,� she cried, �I am a most wicked woman. But it is bad enough
that one should misuse you. Ma foi! I will see that there is not a
second one.�

�Nay, nay, no one has misused me,� he answered. �But the fault lies
in your hot and bitter words. You have called her a baggage and a
lack-brain, and I know not what.�

�And you are he who taught me to speak the truth,� she cried. �Now I
have spoken it, and yet I cannot please you. Lack-brain she is, and
lack-brain I shall call her.�

Such was a sample of the sudden janglings which marred the peace of that
little class. As the weeks passed, however, they became fewer and less
violent, as Alleyne's firm and constant nature gained sway and influence
over the Lady Maude. And yet, sooth to say, there were times when he had
to ask himself whether it was not the Lady Maude who was gaining sway
and influence over him. If she were changing, so was he. In drawing her
up from the world, he was day by day being himself dragged down towards
it. In vain he strove and reasoned with himself as to the madness of
letting his mind rest upon Sir Nigel's daughter. What was he--a younger
son, a penniless clerk, a squire unable to pay for his own harness--that
he should dare to raise his eyes to the fairest maid in Hampshire? So
spake reason; but, in spite of all, her voice was ever in his ears and
her image in his heart. Stronger than reason, stronger than cloister
teachings, stronger than all that might hold him back, was that old, old
tyrant who will brook no rival in the kingdom of youth.

And yet it was a surprise and a shock to himself to find how deeply
she had entered into his life; how completely those vague ambitions and
yearnings which had filled his spiritual nature centred themselves now
upon this thing of earth. He had scarce dared to face the change which
had come upon him, when a few sudden chance words showed it all up hard
and clear, like a lightning flash in the darkness.

He had ridden over to Poole, one November day, with his fellow-squire,
Peter Terlake, in quest of certain yew-staves from Wat Swathling, the
Dorsetshire armorer. The day for their departure had almost come, and
the two youths spurred it over the lonely downs at the top of their
speed on their homeward course, for evening had fallen and there was
much to be done. Peter was a hard, wiry, brown faced, country-bred lad
who looked on the coming war as the schoolboy looks on his holidays.
This day, however, he had been sombre and mute, with scarce a word a
mile to bestow upon his comrade.

�Tell me Alleyne Edricson,� he broke out, suddenly, as they clattered
along the winding track which leads over the Bournemouth hills, �has it
not seemed to you that of late the Lady Maude is paler and more silent
than is her wont?�

�It may be so,� the other answered shortly.

�And would rather sit distrait by her oriel than ride gayly to the chase
as of old. Methinks, Alleyne, it is this learning which you have taught
her that has taken all the life and sap from her. It is more than she
can master, like a heavy spear to a light rider.�

�Her lady-mother has so ordered it,� said Alleyne.

�By our Lady! and withouten disrespect,� quoth Terlake, �it is in my
mind that her lady-mother is more fitted to lead a company to a storming
than to have the upbringing of this tender and milk-white maid. Hark ye,
lad Alleyne, to what I never told man or woman yet. I love the fair Lady
Maude, and would give the last drop of my heart's blood to serve her.�
 He spoke with a gasping voice, and his face flushed crimson in the
moonlight.

Alleyne said nothing, but his heart seemed to turn to a lump of ice in
his bosom.

�My father has broad acres,� the other continued, �from Fareham Creek to
the slope of the Portsdown Hill. There is filling of granges, hewing
of wood, malting of grain, and herding of sheep as much as heart could
wish, and I the only son. Sure am I that Sir Nigel would be blithe at
such a match.�

�But how of the lady?� asked Alleyne, with dry lips.

�Ah, lad, there lies my trouble. It is a toss of the head and a droop of
the eyes if I say one word of what is in my mind. 'Twere as easy to woo
the snow-dame that we shaped last winter in our castle yard. I did but
ask her yesternight for her green veil, that I might bear it as a token
or lambrequin upon my helm; but she flashed out at me that she kept it
for a better man, and then all in a breath asked pardon for that she had
spoke so rudely. Yet she would not take back the words either, nor would
she grant the veil. Has it seemed to thee, Alleyne, that she loves any
one?�

�Nay, I cannot say,� said Alleyne, with a wild throb of sudden hope in
his heart.

�I have thought so, and yet I cannot name the man. Indeed, save myself,
and Walter Ford, and you, who are half a clerk, and Father Christopher
of the Priory, and Bertrand the page, who is there whom she sees?�

�I cannot tell,� quoth Alleyne shortly; and the two squires rode on
again, each intent upon his own thoughts.

Next day at morning lesson the teacher observed that his pupil was
indeed looking pale and jaded, with listless eyes and a weary manner. He
was heavy-hearted to note the grievous change in her.

�Your mistress, I fear, is ill, Agatha,� he said to the tire-woman, when
the Lady Maude had sought her chamber.

The maid looked aslant at him with laughing eyes. �It is not an illness
that kills,� quoth she.

�Pray God not!� he cried. �But tell me, Agatha, what it is that ails
her?�

�Methinks that I could lay my hand upon another who is smitten with the
same trouble,� said she, with the same sidelong look. �Canst not give a
name to it, and thou so skilled in leech-craft?�

�Nay, save that she seems aweary.�

�Well, bethink you that it is but three days ere you will all be gone,
and Castle Twynham be as dull as the Priory. Is there not enough there
to cloud a lady's brow?�

�In sooth, yes,� he answered; �I had forgot that she is about to lose
her father.�

�Her father!� cried the tire-woman, with a little trill of laughter. �Oh
simple, simple!� And she was off down the passage like arrow from bow,
while Alleyne stood gazing after her, betwixt hope and doubt, scarce
daring to put faith in the meaning which seemed to underlie her words.



CHAPTER XIII. HOW THE WHITE COMPANY SET FORTH TO THE WARS.


St. Luke's day had come and had gone, and it was in the season of
Martinmas, when the oxen are driven in to the slaughter, that the White
Company was ready for its journey. Loud shrieked the brazen bugles from
keep and from gateway, and merry was the rattle of the war-drum, as the
men gathered in the outer bailey, with torches to light them, for the
morn had not yet broken. Alleyne, from the window of the armory, looked
down upon the strange scene--the circles of yellow flickering light,
the lines of stern and bearded faces, the quick shimmer of arms, and the
lean heads of the horses. In front stood the bow-men, ten deep, with a
fringe of under-officers, who paced hither and thither marshalling the
ranks with curt precept or short rebuke. Behind were the little clump
of steel-clad horsemen, their lances raised, with long pensils drooping
down the oaken shafts. So silent and still were they, that they might
have been metal-sheathed statues, were it not for the occasional quick,
impatient stamp of their chargers, or the rattle of chamfron against
neck-plates as they tossed and strained. A spear's length in front of
them sat the spare and long-limbed figure of Black Simon, the Norwich
fighting man, his fierce, deep-lined face framed in steel, and the
silk guidon marked with the five scarlet roses slanting over his right
shoulder. All round, in the edge of the circle of the light, stood the
castle servants, the soldiers who were to form the garrison, and little
knots of women, who sobbed in their aprons and called shrilly to their
name-saints to watch over the Wat, or Will, or Peterkin who had turned
his hand to the work of war.

The young squire was leaning forward, gazing at the stirring and martial
scene, when he heard a short, quick gasp at his shoulder, and there was
the Lady Maude, with her hand to her heart, leaning up against the wall,
slender and fair, like a half-plucked lily. Her face was turned away
from him, but he could see, by the sharp intake of her breath, that she
was weeping bitterly.

�Alas! alas!� he cried, all unnerved at the sight, �why is it that you
are so sad, lady?�

�It is the sight of these brave men,� she answered; �and to think how
many of them go and how few are like to find their way back. I have seen
it before, when I was a little maid, in the year of the Prince's great
battle. I remember then how they mustered in the bailey, even as they do
now, and my lady-mother holding me in her arms at this very window that
I might see the show.�

�Please God, you will see them all back ere another year be out,� said
he.

She shook her head, looking round at him with flushed cheeks and eyes
that sparkled in the lamp-light. �Oh, but I hate myself for being a
woman!� she cried, with a stamp of her little foot. �What can I do that
is good? Here I must bide, and talk and sew and spin, and spin and sew
and talk. Ever the same dull round, with nothing at the end of it. And
now you are going too, who could carry my thoughts out of these gray
walls, and raise my mind above tapestry and distaffs. What can I do? I
am of no more use or value than that broken bowstave.�

�You are of such value to me,� he cried, in a whirl of hot, passionate
words, �that all else has become nought. You are my heart, my life, my
one and only thought. Oh, Maude, I cannot live without you, I cannot
leave you without a word of love. All is changed to me since I have
known you. I am poor and lowly and all unworthy of you; but if great
love may weigh down such defects, then mine may do it. Give me but one
word of hope to take to the wars with me--but one. Ah, you shrink, you
shudder! My wild words have frightened you.�

Twice she opened her lips, and twice no sound came from them. At last
she spoke in a hard and measured voice, as one who dare not trust
herself to speak too freely.

�This is over sudden,� she said; �it is not so long since the world was
nothing to you. You have changed once; perchance you may change again.�

�Cruel!� he cried, �who hath changed me?�

�And then your brother,� she continued with a little laugh, disregarding
his question. �Methinks this hath become a family custom amongst the
Edricsons. Nay, I am sorry; I did not mean a jibe. But, indeed, Alleyne,
this hath come suddenly upon me, and I scarce know what to say.�

�Say some word of hope, however distant--some kind word that I may
cherish in my heart.�

�Nay, Alleyne, it were a cruel kindness, and you have been too good and
true a friend to me that I should use you despitefully. There cannot be
a closer link between us. It is madness to think of it. Were there no
other reasons, it is enough that my father and your brother would both
cry out against it.�

�My brother, what has he to do with it? And your father----�

�Come, Alleyne, was it not you who would have me act fairly to all men,
and, certes, to my father amongst them?�

�You say truly,� he cried, �you say truly. But you do not reject me,
Maude? You give me some ray of hope? I do not ask pledge or promise. Say
only that I am not hateful to you--that on some happier day I may hear
kinder words from you.�

Her eyes softened upon him, and a kind answer was on her lips, when a
hoarse shout, with the clatter of arms and stamping of steeds, rose up
from the bailey below. At the sound her face set her eyes sparkled, and
she stood with flushed cheek and head thrown back--a woman's body, with
a soul of fire.

�My father hath gone down,� she cried. �Your place is by his side. Nay,
look not at me, Alleyne. It is no time for dallying. Win my father's
love, and all may follow. It is when the brave soldier hath done his
devoir that he hopes for his reward. Farewell, and may God be with you!�
 She held out her white, slim hand to him, but as he bent his lips over
it she whisked away and was gone, leaving in his outstretched hand the
very green veil for which poor Peter Terlake had craved in vain. Again
the hoarse cheering burst out from below, and he heard the clang of the
rising portcullis. Pressing the veil to his lips, he thrust it into the
bosom of his tunic, and rushed as fast as feet could bear him to arm
himself and join the muster.

The raw morning had broken ere the hot spiced ale had been served round
and the last farewell spoken. A cold wind blew up from the sea and
ragged clouds drifted swiftly across the sky.

The Christchurch townsfolk stood huddled about the Bridge of Avon, the
women pulling tight their shawls and the men swathing themselves in
their gaberdines, while down the winding path from the castle came the
van of the little army, their feet clanging on the hard, frozen road.
First came Black Simon with his banner, bestriding a lean and powerful
dapple-gray charger, as hard and wiry and warwise as himself. After him,
riding three abreast, were nine men-at-arms, all picked soldiers, who
had followed the French wars before, and knew the marches of Picardy as
they knew the downs of their native Hampshire. They were armed to the
teeth with lance, sword, and mace, with square shields notched at the
upper right-hand corner to serve as a spear-rest. For defence each man
wore a coat of interlaced leathern thongs, strengthened at the shoulder,
elbow, and upper arm with slips of steel. Greaves and knee-pieces were
also of leather backed by steel, and their gauntlets and shoes were of
iron plates, craftily jointed. So, with jingle of arms and clatter of
hoofs, they rode across the Bridge of Avon, while the burghers shouted
lustily for the flag of the five roses and its gallant guard.

Close at the heels of the horses came two-score archers bearded and
burly, their round targets on their backs and their long yellow bows,
the most deadly weapon that the wit of man had yet devised, thrusting
forth from behind their shoulders. From each man's girdle hung sword or
axe, according to his humor, and over the right hip there jutted out the
leathern quiver with its bristle of goose, pigeon, and peacock feathers.
Behind the bowmen strode two trumpeters blowing upon nakirs, and two
drummers in parti-colored clothes. After them came twenty-seven sumpter
horses carrying tent-poles, cloth, spare arms, spurs, wedges, cooking
kettles, horse-shoes, bags of nails and the hundred other things which
experience had shown to be needful in a harried and hostile country. A
white mule with red trappings, led by a varlet, carried Sir Nigel's own
napery and table comforts. Then came two-score more archers, ten more
men-at-arms, and finally a rear guard of twenty bowmen, with big John
towering in the front rank and the veteran Aylward marching by the side,
his battered harness and faded surcoat in strange contrast with the
snow-white jupons and shining brigandines of his companions. A quick
cross-fire of greetings and questions and rough West Saxon jests flew
from rank to rank, or were bandied about betwixt the marching archers
and the gazing crowd.

�Hola, Gaffer Higginson!� cried Aylward, as he spied the portly figure
of the village innkeeper. �No more of thy nut-brown, mon gar. We leave
it behind us.�

�By St. Paul, no!� cried the other. �You take it with you. Devil a drop
have you left in the great kilderkin. It was time for you to go.�

�If your cask is leer, I warrant your purse is full, gaffer,� shouted
Hordle John. �See that you lay in good store of the best for our
home-coming.�

�See that you keep your throat whole for the drinking of it archer,�
 cried a voice, and the crowd laughed at the rough pleasantry.

�If you will warrant the beer, I will warrant the throat,� said John
composedly.

�Close up the ranks!� cried Aylward. �En avant, mes enfants! Ah, by my
finger bones, there is my sweet Mary from the Priory Mill! Ma foi, but
she is beautiful! Adieu, Mary ma cherie! Mon coeur est toujours a
toi. Brace your belt, Watkins, man, and swing your shoulders as a free
companion should. By my hilt! your jerkins will be as dirty as mine ere
you clap eyes on Hengistbury Head again.�

The Company had marched to the turn of the road ere Sir Nigel Loring
rode out from the gateway, mounted on Pommers, his great black
war-horse, whose ponderous footfall on the wooden drawbridge echoed
loudly from the gloomy arch which spanned it. Sir Nigel was still in his
velvet dress of peace, with flat velvet cap of maintenance, and curling
ostrich feather clasped in a golden brooch. To his three squires riding
behind him it looked as though he bore the bird's egg as well as its
feather, for the back of his bald pate shone like a globe of ivory. He
bore no arms save the long and heavy sword which hung at his saddle-bow;
but Terlake carried in front of him the high wivern-crested bassinet,
Ford the heavy ash spear with swallow-tail pennon, while Alleyne was
entrusted with the emblazoned shield. The Lady Loring rode her palfrey
at her lord's bridle-arm, for she would see him as far as the edge
of the forest, and ever and anon she turned her hard-lined face
up wistfully to him and ran a questioning eye over his apparel and
appointments.

�I trust that there is nothing forgot,� she said, beckoning to Alleyne
to ride on her further side. �I trust him to you, Edricson. Hosen,
shirts, cyclas, and under-jupons are in the brown basket on the left
side of the mule. His wine he takes hot when the nights are cold,
malvoisie or vernage, with as much spice as would cover the thumb-nail.
See that he hath a change if he come back hot from the tilting. There is
goose-grease in a box, if the old scars ache at the turn of the weather.
Let his blankets be dry and----�

�Nay, my heart's life,� the little knight interrupted, �trouble not now
about such matters. Why so pale and wan, Edricson? Is it not enow
to make a man's heart dance to see this noble Company, such valiant
men-at-arms, such lusty archers? By St. Paul! I would be ill to please
if I were not blithe to see the red roses flying at the head of so noble
a following!�

�The purse I have already given you, Edricson,� continued the lady.
�There are in it twenty-three marks, one noble, three shillings and
fourpence, which is a great treasure for one man to carry. And I pray
you to bear in mind, Edricson, that he hath two pair of shoes, those of
red leather for common use, and the others with golden toe-chains,
which he may wear should he chance to drink wine with the Prince or with
Chandos.�

�My sweet bird,� said Sir Nigel, �I am right loth to part from you,
but we are now at the fringe of the forest, and it is not right that I
should take the chatelaine too far from her trust.�

�But oh, my dear lord,� she cried with a trembling lip, �let me bide
with you for one furlong further--or one and a half perhaps. You may
spare me this out of the weary miles that you will journey along.�

�Come, then, my heart's comfort,� he answered. �But I must crave a gage
from thee. It is my custom, dearling, and hath been since I have
first known thee, to proclaim by herald in such camps, townships, or
fortalices as I may chance to visit, that my lady-love, being beyond
compare the fairest and sweetest in Christendom, I should deem it great
honor and kindly condescension if any cavalier would run three courses
against me with sharpened lances, should he chance to have a lady whose
claim he was willing to advance. I pray you then my fair dove, that you
will vouchsafe to me one of those doeskin gloves, that I may wear it as
the badge of her whose servant I shall ever be.�

�Alack and alas for the fairest and sweetest!� she cried. �Fair and
sweet I would fain be for your dear sake, my lord, but old I am and
ugly, and the knights would laugh should you lay lance in rest in such a
cause.�

�Edricson,� quoth Sir Nigel, �you have young eyes, and mine are somewhat
bedimmed. Should you chance to see a knight laugh, or smile, or even,
look you, arch his brows, or purse his mouth, or in any way show
surprise that I should uphold the Lady Mary, you will take particular
note of his name, his coat-armor, and his lodging. Your glove, my life's
desire!�

The Lady Mary Loring slipped her hand from her yellow leather gauntlet,
and he, lifting it with dainty reverence, bound it to the front of his
velvet cap.

�It is with mine other guardian angels,� quoth he, pointing at the
saints' medals which hung beside it. �And now, my dearest, you have come
far enow. May the Virgin guard and prosper thee! One kiss!� He bent down
from his saddle, and then, striking spurs into his horse's sides, he
galloped at top speed after his men, with his three squires at his
heels. Half a mile further, where the road topped a hill, they looked
back, and the Lady Mary on her white palfrey was still where they had
left her. A moment later they were on the downward slope, and she had
vanished from their view.



CHAPTER XIV. HOW SIR NIGEL SOUGHT FOR A WAYSIDE VENTURE.


For a time Sir Nigel was very moody and downcast, with bent brows and
eyes upon the pommel of his saddle. Edricson and Terlake rode behind him
in little better case, while Ford, a careless and light-hearted youth,
grinned at the melancholy of his companions, and flourished his lord's
heavy spear, making a point to right and a point to left, as though
he were a paladin contending against a host of assailants. Sir Nigel
happened, however, to turn himself in his saddle--Ford instantly became
as stiff and as rigid as though he had been struck with a palsy. The
four rode alone, for the archers had passed a curve in the road, though
Alleyne could still hear the heavy clump, clump of their marching, or
catch a glimpse of the sparkle of steel through the tangle of leafless
branches.

�Ride by my side, friends, I entreat of you,� said the knight, reining
in his steed that they might come abreast of him. �For, since it hath
pleased you to follow me to the wars, it were well that you should know
how you may best serve me. I doubt not, Terlake, that you will show
yourself a worthy son of a valiant father; and you, Ford, of yours; and
you, Edricson, that you are mindful of the old-time house from which
all men know that you are sprung. And first I would have you bear
very steadfastly in mind that our setting forth is by no means for the
purpose of gaining spoil or exacting ransom, though it may well happen
that such may come to us also. We go to France, and from thence I trust
to Spain, in humble search of a field in which we may win advancement
and perchance some small share of glory. For this purpose I would have
you know that it is not my wont to let any occasion pass where it is in
any way possible that honor may be gained. I would have you bear this
in mind, and give great heed to it that you may bring me word of all
cartels, challenges, wrongs, tyrannies, infamies, and wronging of
damsels. Nor is any occasion too small to take note of, for I have
known such trifles as the dropping of a gauntlet, or the flicking of
a breadcrumb, when well and properly followed up, lead to a most noble
spear-running. But, Edricson, do I not see a cavalier who rides down
yonder road amongst the nether shaw? It would be well, perchance, that
you should give him greeting from me. And, should he be of gentle blood
it may be that he would care to exchange thrusts with me.�

�Why, my lord,� quoth Ford, standing in his stirrups and shading his
eyes, �it is old Hob Davidson, the fat miller of Milton!�

�Ah, so it is, indeed,� said Sir Nigel, puckering his cheeks; �but
wayside ventures are not to be scorned, for I have seen no finer
passages than are to be had from such chance meetings, when cavaliers
are willing to advance themselves. I can well remember that two leagues
from the town of Rheims I met a very valiant and courteous cavalier of
France, with whom I had gentle and most honorable contention for upwards
of an hour. It hath ever grieved me that I had not his name, for he
smote upon me with a mace and went upon his way ere I was in condition
to have much speech with him; but his arms were an allurion in chief
above a fess azure. I was also on such an occasion thrust through the
shoulder by Lyon de Montcourt, whom I met on the high road betwixt
Libourne and Bordeaux. I met him but the once, but I have never seen
a man for whom I bear a greater love and esteem. And so also with the
squire Le Bourg Capillet, who would have been a very valiant captain had
he lived.�

�He is dead then?� asked Alleyne Edricson.

�Alas! it was my ill fate to slay him in a bickering which broke out in
a field near the township of Tarbes. I cannot call to mind how the
thing came about, for it was in the year of the Prince's ride through
Languedoc, when there was much fine skirmishing to be had at barriers.
By St. Paul! I do not think that any honorable cavalier could ask for
better chance of advancement than might be had by spurring forth before
the army and riding to the gateways of Narbonne, or Bergerac or Mont
Giscar, where some courteous gentleman would ever be at wait to do
what he might to meet your wish or ease you of your vow. Such a one at
Ventadour ran three courses with me betwixt daybreak and sunrise, to the
great exaltation of his lady.�

�And did you slay him also, my lord?� asked Ford with reverence.

�I could never learn, for he was carried within the barrier, and as I
had chanced to break the bone of my leg it was a great unease for me
to ride or even to stand. Yet, by the goodness of heaven and the pious
intercession of the valiant St. George, I was able to sit my charger
in the ruffle of Poictiers, which was no very long time afterwards. But
what have we here? A very fair and courtly maiden, or I mistake.�

It was indeed a tall and buxom country lass, with a basket of
spinach-leaves upon her head, and a great slab of bacon tucked under one
arm. She bobbed a frightened curtsey as Sir Nigel swept his velvet hat
from his head and reined up his great charger.

�God be with thee, fair maiden!� said he.

�God guard thee, my lord!� she answered, speaking in the broadest West
Saxon speech, and balancing herself first on one foot and then on the
other in her bashfulness.

�Fear not, my fair damsel,� said Sir Nigel, �but tell me if perchance
a poor and most unworthy knight can in any wise be of service to you.
Should it chance that you have been used despitefully, it may be that I
may obtain justice for you.�

�Lawk no, kind sir,� she answered, clutching her bacon the tighter, as
though some design upon it might be hid under this knightly offer. �I
be the milking wench o' fairmer Arnold, and he be as kind a maister as
heart could wish.�

�It is well,� said he, and with a shake of the bridle rode on down the
woodland path. �I would have you bear in mind,� he continued to his
squires, �that gentle courtesy is not, as is the base use of so many
false knights, to be shown only to maidens of high degree, for there
is no woman so humble that a true knight may not listen to her tale of
wrong. But here comes a cavalier who is indeed in haste. Perchance it
would be well that we should ask him whither he rides, for it may be
that he is one who desires to advance himself in chivalry.�

The bleak, hard, wind-swept road dipped down in front of them into a
little valley, and then, writhing up the heathy slope upon the other
side, lost itself among the gaunt pine-trees. Far away between the black
lines of trunks the quick glitter of steel marked where the Company
pursued its way. To the north stretched the tree country, but to the
south, between two swelling downs, a glimpse might be caught of the cold
gray shimmer of the sea, with the white fleck of a galley sail upon the
distant sky-line. Just in front of the travellers a horseman was urging
his steed up the slope, driving it on with whip and spur as one who
rides for a set purpose. As he clattered up, Alleyne could see that the
roan horse was gray with dust and flecked with foam, as though it had
left many a mile behind it. The rider was a stern-faced man, hard of
mouth and dry of eye, with a heavy sword clanking at his side, and a
stiff white bundle swathed in linen balanced across the pommel of his
saddle.

�The king's messenger,� he bawled as he came up to them. �The messenger
of the king. Clear the causeway for the king's own man.�

�Not so loudly, friend,� quoth the little knight, reining his horse half
round to bar the path. �I have myself been the king's man for thirty
years or more, but I have not been wont to halloo about it on a peaceful
highway.�

�I ride in his service,� cried the other, �and I carry that which
belongs to him. You bar my path at your peril.�

�Yet I have known the king's enemies claim to ride in his same,� said
Sir Nigel. �The foul fiend may lurk beneath a garment of light. We must
have some sign or warrant of your mission.�

�Then must I hew a passage,� cried the stranger, with his shoulder
braced round and his hand upon his hilt. �I am not to be stopped on the
king's service by every gadabout.�

�Should you be a gentleman of quarterings and coat-armor,� lisped Sir
Nigel, �I shall be very blithe to go further into the matter with you.
If not, I have three very worthy squires, any one of whom would take the
thing upon himself, and debate it with you in a very honorable way.�

The man scowled from one to the other, and his hand stole away from his
sword.

�You ask me for a sign,� he said. �Here is a sign for you, since you
must have one.� As he spoke he whirled the covering from the object
in front of him and showed to their horror that it was a newly-severed
human leg. �By God's tooth!� he continued, with a brutal laugh, �you ask
me if I am a man of quarterings, and it is even so, for I am officer
to the verderer's court at Lyndhurst. This thievish leg is to hang at
Milton, and the other is already at Brockenhurst, as a sign to all men
of what comes of being over-fond of venison pasty.�

�Faugh!� cried Sir Nigel. �Pass on the other side of the road, fellow,
and let us have the wind of you. We shall trot our horses, my friends,
across this pleasant valley, for, by Our Lady! a breath of God's fresh
air is right welcome after such a sight.�

�We hoped to snare a falcon,� said he presently, �but we netted a
carrion-crow. Ma foi! but there are men whose hearts are tougher than a
boar's hide. For me, I have played the old game of war since ever I had
hair on my chin, and I have seen ten thousand brave men in one day with
their faces to the sky, but I swear by Him who made me that I cannot
abide the work of the butcher.�

�And yet, my fair lord,� said Edricson, �there has, from what I hear,
been much of such devil's work in France.�

�Too much, too much,� he answered. �But I have ever observed that the
foremost in the field are they who would scorn to mishandle a prisoner.
By St. Paul! it is not they who carry the breach who are wont to sack
the town, but the laggard knaves who come crowding in when a way has
been cleared for them. But what is this among the trees?�

�It is a shrine of Our Lady,� said Terlake, �and a blind beggar who
lives by the alms of those who worship there.�

�A shrine!� cried the knight. �Then let us put up an orison.� Pulling
off his cap, and clasping his hands, he chanted in a shrill voice:
�Benedictus dominus Deus meus, qui docet manus meas ad proelium,
et digitos meos ad bellum.� A strange figure he seemed to his three
squires, perched on his huge horse, with his eyes upturned and the
wintry sun shimmering upon his bald head. �It is a noble prayer,� he
remarked, putting on his hat again, �and it was taught to me by the
noble Chandos himself. But how fares it with you, father? Methinks that
I should have ruth upon you, seeing that I am myself like one who looks
through a horn window while his neighbors have the clear crystal. Yet,
by St. Paul! there is a long stride between the man who hath a horn
casement and him who is walled in on every hand.�

�Alas! fair sir,� cried the blind old man, �I have not seen the blessed
blue of heaven this two-score years, since a levin flash burned the
sight out of my head.�

�You have been blind to much that is goodly and fair,� quoth Sir Nigel,
�but you have also been spared much that is sorry and foul. This very
hour our eyes have been shocked with that which would have left you
unmoved. But, by St. Paul! we must on, or our Company will think that
they have lost their captain somewhat early in the venture. Throw the
man my purse, Edricson, and let us go.�

Alleyne, lingering behind, bethought him of the Lady Loring's counsel,
and reduced the noble gift which the knight had so freely bestowed to a
single penny, which the beggar with many mumbled blessings thrust away
into his wallet. Then, spurring his steed, the young squire rode at the
top of his speed after his companions, and overtook them just at the
spot where the trees fringe off into the moor and the straggling hamlet
of Hordle lies scattered on either side of the winding and deeply-rutted
track. The Company was already well-nigh through the village; but, as
the knight and his squires closed up upon them, they heard the clamor of
a strident voice, followed by a roar of deep-chested laughter from
the ranks of the archers. Another minute brought them up with the
rear-guard, where every man marched with his beard on his shoulder and a
face which was agrin with merriment. By the side of the column walked
a huge red-headed bowman, with his hands thrown out in argument and
expostulation, while close at his heels followed a little wrinkled
woman who poured forth a shrill volley of abuse, varied by an occasional
thwack from her stick, given with all the force of her body, though she
might have been beating one of the forest trees for all the effect that
she seemed likely to produce.

�I trust, Aylward,� said Sir Nigel gravely, as he rode up, �that this
doth not mean that any violence hath been offered to women. If such a
thing happened, I tell you that the man shall hang, though he were the
best archer that ever wore brassart.�

�Nay, my fair lord,� Aylward answered with a grin, �it is violence which
is offered to a man. He comes from Hordle, and this is his mother who
hath come forth to welcome him.�

�You rammucky lurden,� she was howling, with a blow between each catch
of her breath, �you shammocking, yaping, over-long good-for-nought. I
will teach thee! I will baste thee! Aye, by my faith!�

�Whist, mother,� said John, looking back at her from the tail of his
eye, �I go to France as an archer to give blows and to take them.�

�To France, quotha?� cried the old dame. �Bide here with me, and I shall
warrant you more blows than you are like to get in France. If blows be
what you seek, you need not go further than Hordle.�

�By my hilt! the good dame speaks truth,� said Aylward. �It seems to be
the very home of them.�

�What have you to say, you clean-shaved galley-beggar?� cried the fiery
dame, turning upon the archer. �Can I not speak with my own son but you
must let your tongue clack? A soldier, quotha, and never a hair on
his face. I have seen a better soldier with pap for food and swaddling
clothes for harness.�

�Stand to it, Aylward,� cried the archers, amid a fresh burst of
laughter.

�Do not thwart her, comrade,� said big John. �She hath a proper spirit
for her years and cannot abide to be thwarted. It is kindly and homely
to me to hear her voice and to feel that she is behind me. But I must
leave you now, mother, for the way is over-rough for your feet; but I
will bring you back a silken gown, if there be one in France or Spain,
and I will bring Jinny a silver penny; so good-bye to you, and God have
you in His keeping!� Whipping up the little woman, he lifted her lightly
to his lips, and then, taking his place in the ranks again, marched on
with the laughing Company.

�That was ever his way,� she cried, appealing to Sir Nigel, who reined
up his horse and listened with the greatest courtesy. �He would jog on
his own road for all that I could do to change him. First he must be a
monk forsooth, and all because a wench was wise enough to turn her back
on him. Then he joins a rascally crew and must needs trapse off to the
wars, and me with no one to bait the fire if I be out, or tend the cow
if I be home. Yet I have been a good mother to him. Three hazel switches
a day have I broke across his shoulders, and he takes no more notice
than you have seen him to-day.�

�Doubt not that he will come back to you both safe and prosperous, my
fair dame,� quoth Sir Nigel. �Meanwhile it grieves me that as I have
already given my purse to a beggar up the road I----�

�Nay, my lord,� said Alleyne, �I still have some moneys remaining.�

�Then I pray you to give them to this very worthy woman.� He cantered
on as he spoke, while Alleyne, having dispensed two more pence, left
the old dame standing by the furthest cottage of Hordle, with her shrill
voice raised in blessings instead of revilings.

There were two cross-roads before they reached the Lymington Ford, and
at each of then Sir Nigel pulled up his horse, and waited with many a
curvet and gambade, craning his neck this way and that to see if fortune
would send him a venture. Crossroads had, as he explained, been rare
places for knightly spear-runnings, and in his youth it was no uncommon
thing for a cavalier to abide for weeks at such a point, holding gentle
debate with all comers, to his own advancement and the great honor of
his lady. The times were changed, however, and the forest tracks wound
away from them deserted and silent, with no trample of war-horse or
clang of armor which might herald the approach of an adversary--so that
Sir Nigel rode on his way disconsolate. At the Lymington River they
splashed through the ford, and lay in the meadows on the further side to
eat the bread and salt meat which they carried upon the sumpter horses.
Then, ere the sun was on the slope of the heavens, they had deftly
trussed up again, and were swinging merrily upon their way, two hundred
feet moving like two.

There is a third cross-road where the track from Boldre runs down to the
old fishing village of Pitt's Deep. Down this, as they came abreast of
it, there walked two men, the one a pace or two behind the other. The
cavaliers could not but pull up their horses to look at them, for a
stranger pair were never seen journeying together. The first was a
misshapen, squalid man with cruel, cunning eyes and a shock of tangled
red hair, bearing in his hands a small unpainted cross, which he held
high so that all men might see it. He seemed to be in the last extremity
of fright, with a face the color of clay and his limbs all ashake as one
who hath an ague. Behind him, with his toe ever rasping upon the other's
heels, there walked a very stern, black-bearded man with a hard eye and
a set mouth. He bore over his shoulder a great knotted stick with three
jagged nails stuck in the head of it, and from time to time he whirled
it up in the air with a quivering arm, as though he could scarce hold
back from dashing his companion's brains out. So in silence they walked
under the spread of the branches on the grass-grown path from Boldre.

�By St. Paul!� quoth the knight, �but this is a passing strange sight,
and perchance some very perilous and honorable venture may arise from
it. I pray you, Edricson, to ride up to them and to ask them the cause
of it.�

There was no need, however, for him to move, for the twain came swiftly
towards them until they were within a spear's length, when the man
with the cross sat himself down sullenly upon a tussock of grass by the
wayside, while the other stood beside him with his great cudgel still
hanging over his head. So intent was he that he raised his eyes neither
to knight nor squires, but kept them ever fixed with a savage glare upon
his comrade.

�I pray you, friend,� said Sir Nigel, �to tell us truthfully who you
are, and why you follow this man with such bitter enmity?�

�So long as I am within the pale of the king's law,� the stranger
answered, �I cannot see why I should render account to every passing
wayfarer.�

�You are no very shrewd reasoner, fellow,� quoth the knight; �for if
it be within the law for you to threaten him with your club, then it is
also lawful for me to threaten you with my sword.�

The man with the cross was down in an instant on his knees upon the
ground, with hands clasped above him and his face shining with hope.
�For dear Christ's sake, my fair lord,� he cried in a crackling voice,
�I have at my belt a bag with a hundred rose nobles, and I will give it
to you freely if you will but pass your sword through this man's body.�

�How, you foul knave?� exclaimed Sir Nigel hotly. �Do you think that
a cavalier's arm is to be bought like a packman's ware. By St. Paul! I
have little doubt that this fellow hath some very good cause to hold you
in hatred.�

�Indeed, my fair sir, you speak sooth,� quoth he with the club, while
the other seated himself once more by the wayside. �For this man is
Peter Peterson, a very noted rieve, draw-latch, and murtherer, who has
wrought much evil for many years in the parts about Winchester. It was
but the other day, upon the feasts of the blessed Simon and Jude, that
he slew my younger brother William in Bere Forest--for which, by the
black thorn of Glastonbury! I shall have his heart's blood, though I
walk behind him to the further end of earth.�

�But if this be indeed so,� asked Sir Nigel, �why is it that you have
come with him so far through the forest?�

�Because I am an honest Englishman, and will take no more than the law
allows. For when the deed was done this foul and base wretch fled to
sanctuary at St. Cross, and I, as you may think, after him with all
the posse. The prior, however, hath so ordered that while he holds this
cross no man may lay hand upon him without the ban of church, which
heaven forfend from me or mine. Yet, if for an instant he lay the cross
aside, or if he fail to journey to Pitt's Deep, where it is ordered that
he shall take ship to outland parts, or if he take not the first ship,
or if until the ship be ready he walk not every day into the sea as far
as his loins, then he becomes outlaw, and I shall forthwith dash out his
brains.�

At this the man on the ground snarled up at him like a rat, while the
other clenched his teeth, and shook his club, and looked down at him
with murder in his eyes. Knight and squire gazed from rogue to avenger,
but as it was a matter which none could mend they tarried no longer, but
rode upon their way. Alleyne, looking back, saw that the murderer had
drawn bread and cheese from his scrip, and was silently munching it,
with the protecting cross still hugged to his breast, while the other,
black and grim, stood in the sunlit road and threw his dark shadow
athwart him.



CHAPTER XV. HOW THE YELLOW COG SAILED FORTH FROM LEPE.


That night the Company slept at St. Leonard's, in the great monastic
barns and spicarium--ground well known both to Alleyne and to John, for
they were almost within sight of the Abbey of Beaulieu. A strange thrill
it gave to the young squire to see the well-remembered white dress once
more, and to hear the measured tolling of the deep vespers bell.
At early dawn they passed across the broad, sluggish, reed-girt
stream--men, horses, and baggage in the flat ferry barges--and so
journeyed on through the fresh morning air past Exbury to Lepe.
Topping the heathy down, they came of a sudden full in sight of the old
sea-port--a cluster of houses, a trail of blue smoke, and a bristle of
masts. To right and left the long blue curve of the Solent lapped in a
fringe of foam upon the yellow beach. Some way out from the town a line
of pessoners, creyers, and other small craft were rolling lazily on the
gentle swell. Further out still lay a great merchant-ship, high ended,
deep waisted, painted of a canary yellow, and towering above the
fishing-boats like a swan among ducklings.

�By St. Paul!� said the knight, �our good merchant of Southampton hath
not played us false, for methinks I can see our ship down yonder. He
said that she would be of great size and of a yellow shade.�

�By my hilt, yes!� muttered Aylward; �she is yellow as a kite's claw,
and would carry as many men as there are pips in a pomegranate.�

�It is as well,� remarked Terlake; �for methinks, my fair lord, that
we are not the only ones who are waiting a passage to Gascony. Mine eye
catches at times a flash and sparkle among yonder houses which assuredly
never came from shipman's jacket or the gaberdine of a burgher.�

�I can also see it,� said Alleyne, shading his eyes with his hand. �And
I can see men-at-arms in yonder boats which ply betwixt the vessel and
the shore. But methinks that we are very welcome here, for already they
come forth to meet us.�

A tumultuous crowd of fishermen, citizens, and women had indeed swarmed
out from the northern gate, and approached them up the side of the moor,
waving their hands and dancing with joy, as though a great fear had been
rolled back from their minds. At their head rode a very large and solemn
man with a long chin and a drooping lip. He wore a fur tippet round his
neck and a heavy gold chain over it, with a medallion which dangled in
front of him.

�Welcome, most puissant and noble lord,� he cried, doffing his bonnet
to Black Simon. �I have heard of your lordship's valiant deeds, and in
sooth they might be expected from your lordship's face and bearing. Is
there any small matter in which I may oblige you?�

�Since you ask me,� said the man-at-arms, �I would take it kindly if you
could spare a link or two of the chain which hangs round your neck.�

�What, the corporation chain!� cried the other in horror. �The ancient
chain of the township of Lepe! This is but a sorry jest, Sir Nigel.�

�What the plague did you ask me for then?� said Simon. �But if it is
Sir Nigel Loring with whom you would speak, that is he upon the black
horse.�

The Mayor of Lepe gazed with amazement on the mild face and slender
frame of the famous warrior.

�Your pardon, my gracious lord,� he cried. �You see in me the mayor and
chief magistrate of the ancient and powerful town of Lepe. I bid you
very heartily welcome, and the more so as you are come at a moment when
we are sore put to it for means of defence.�

�Ha!� cried Sir Nigel, pricking up his ears.

�Yes, my lord, for the town being very ancient and the walls as old
as the town, it follows that they are very ancient too. But there is a
certain villainous and bloodthirsty Norman pirate hight Tete-noire, who,
with a Genoan called Tito Caracci, commonly known as Spade-beard, hath
been a mighty scourge upon these coasts. Indeed, my lord, they are very
cruel and black-hearted men, graceless and ruthless, and if they should
come to the ancient and powerful town of Lepe then--�

�Then good-bye to the ancient and powerful town of Lepe,� quoth Ford,
whose lightness of tongue could at times rise above his awe of Sir
Nigel.

The knight, however, was too much intent upon the matter in hand to give
heed to the flippancy of his squire. �Have you then cause,� he asked,
�to think that these men are about to venture an attempt upon you?�

�They have come in two great galleys,� answered the mayor, �with two
bank of oars on either side, and great store of engines of war and
of men-at-arms. At Weymouth and at Portland they have murdered and
ravished. Yesterday morning they were at Cowes, and we saw the smoke
from the burning crofts. To-day they lie at their ease near Freshwater,
and we fear much lest they come upon us and do us a mischief.�

�We cannot tarry,� said Sir Nigel, riding towards the town, with the
mayor upon his left side; �the Prince awaits us at Bordeaux, and we may
not be behind the general muster. Yet I will promise you that on our way
we shall find time to pass Freshwater and to prevail upon these rovers
to leave you in peace.�

�We are much beholden to you!� cried the mayor �But I cannot see, my
lord, how, without a war-ship, you may venture against these men. With
your archers, however, you might well hold the town and do them great
scath if they attempt to land.�

�There is a very proper cog out yonder,� said Sir Nigel, �it would be a
very strange thing if any ship were not a war-ship when it had such men
as these upon her decks. Certes, we shall do as I say, and that no later
than this very day.�

�My lord,� said a rough-haired, dark-faced man, who walked by the
knight's other stirrup, with his head sloped to catch all that he was
saying. �By your leave, I have no doubt that you are skilled in land
fighting and the marshalling of lances, but, by my soul! you will find
it another thing upon the sea. I am the master-shipman of this yellow
cog, and my name is Goodwin Hawtayne. I have sailed since I was as high
as this staff, and I have fought against these Normans and against the
Genoese, as well as the Scotch, the Bretons, the Spanish, and the Moors.
I tell you, sir, that my ship is over light and over frail for such
work, and it will but end in our having our throats cut, or being sold
as slaves to the Barbary heathen.�

�I also have experienced one or two gentle and honorable ventures upon
the sea,� quoth Sir Nigel, �and I am right blithe to have so fair a task
before us. I think, good master-shipman, that you and I may win great
honor in this matter, and I can see very readily that you are a brave
and stout man.�

�I like it not,� said the other sturdily. �In God's name, I like it not.
And yet Goodwin Hawtayne is not the man to stand back when his fellows
are for pressing forward. By my soul! be it sink or swim, I shall
turn her beak into Freshwater Bay, and if good Master Witherton, of
Southampton, like not my handling of his ship then he may find another
master-shipman.�

They were close by the old north gate of the little town, and Alleyne,
half turning in his saddle, looked back at the motley crowd who
followed. The bowmen and men-at-arms had broken their ranks and were
intermingled with the fishermen and citizens, whose laughing faces
and hearty gestures bespoke the weight of care from which this welcome
arrival had relieved them. Here and there among the moving throng of
dark jerkins and of white surcoats were scattered dashes of scarlet and
blue, the whimples or shawls of the women. Aylward, with a fishing lass
on either arm, was vowing constancy alternately to her on the right and
her on the left, while big John towered in the rear with a little chubby
maiden enthroned upon his great shoulder, her soft white arm curled
round his shining headpiece. So the throng moved on, until at the very
gate it was brought to a stand by a wondrously fat man, who came darting
forth from the town with rage in every feature of his rubicund face.

�How now, Sir Mayor?� he roared, in a voice like a bull. �How now, Sir
Mayor? How of the clams and the scallops?�

�By Our Lady! my sweet Sir Oliver,� cried the mayor. �I have had so much
to think of, with these wicked villains so close upon us, that it had
quite gone out of my head.�

�Words, words!� shouted the other furiously. �Am I to be put off with
words? I say to you again, how of the clams and scallops?�

�My fair sir, you flatter me,� cried the mayor. �I am a peaceful trader,
and I am not wont to be so shouted at upon so small a matter.�

�Small!� shrieked the other. �Small! Clams and scallops! Ask me to your
table to partake of the dainty of the town, and when I come a barren
welcome and a bare board! Where is my spear-bearer?�

�Nay, Sir Oliver, Sir Oliver!� cried Sir Nigel, laughing.

�Let your anger be appeased, since instead of this dish you come upon an
old friend and comrade.�

�By St. Martin of Tours!� shouted the fat knight, his wrath all changed
in an instant to joy, �if it is not my dear little game rooster of the
Garonne. Ah, my sweet coz, I am right glad to see you. What days we have
seen together!�

�Aye, by my faith,� cried Sir Nigel, with sparkling eyes, �we have
seen some valiant men, and we have shown our pennons in some noble
skirmishes. By St. Paul! we have had great joys in France.�

�And sorrows also,� quoth the other. �I have some sad memories of the
land. Can you recall that which befell us at Libourne?�

�Nay, I cannot call to mind that we ever so much as drew sword at the
place.�

�Man, man,� cried Sir Oliver, �your mind still runs on nought but blades
and bassinets. Hast no space in thy frame for the softer joys. Ah,
even now I can scarce speak of it unmoved. So noble a pie, such tender
pigeons, and sugar in the gravy instead of salt! You were by my side
that day, as were Sir Claude Latour and the Lord of Pommers.�

�I remember it,� said Sir Nigel, laughing, �and how you harried the cook
down the street, and spoke of setting fire to the inn. By St. Paul! most
worthy mayor, my old friend is a perilous man, and I rede you that you
compose your difference with him on such terms as you may.�

�The clams and scallops shall be ready within the hour,� the mayor
answered. �I had asked Sir Oliver Buttesthorn to do my humble board
the honor to partake at it of the dainty upon which we take some little
pride, but in sooth this alarm of pirates hath cast such a shadow on my
wits that I am like one distrait. But I trust, Sir Nigel, that you will
also partake of none-meat with me?�

�I have overmuch to do,� Sir Nigel answered, �for we must be aboard,
horse and man, as early as we may. How many do you muster, Sir Oliver?�

�Three and forty. The forty are drunk, and the three are but indifferent
sober. I have them all safe upon the ship.�

�They had best find their wits again, for I shall have work for every
man of them ere the sun set. It is my intention, if it seems good to
you, to try a venture against these Norman and Genoese rovers.�

�They carry caviare and certain very noble spices from the Levant aboard
of ships from Genoa,� quoth Sir Oliver. �We may come to great profit
through the business. I pray you, master-shipman, that when you go on
board you pour a helmetful of sea-water over any of my rogues whom you
may see there.�

Leaving the lusty knight and the Mayor of Lepe, Sir Nigel led the
Company straight down to the water's edge, where long lines of flat
lighters swiftly bore them to their vessel. Horse after horse was slung
by main force up from the barges, and after kicking and plunging in
empty air was dropped into the deep waist of the yellow cog, where rows
of stalls stood ready for their safe keeping. Englishmen in those days
were skilled and prompt in such matters, for it was so not long before
that Edward had embarked as many as fifty thousand men in the port
of Orwell, with their horses and their baggage, all in the space of
four-and-twenty hours. So urgent was Sir Nigel on the shore, and so
prompt was Goodwin Hawtayne on the cog, that Sir Oliver Buttesthorn had
scarce swallowed his last scallop ere the peal of the trumpet and clang
of nakir announced that all was ready and the anchor drawn. In the last
boat which left the shore the two commanders sat together in the sheets,
a strange contrast to one another, while under the feet of the rowers
was a litter of huge stones which Sir Nigel had ordered to be carried to
the cog. These once aboard, the ship set her broad mainsail, purple
in color, and with a golden St. Christopher bearing Christ upon his
shoulder in the centre of it. The breeze blew, the sail bellied, over
heeled the portly vessel, and away she plunged through the smooth blue
rollers, amid the clang of the minstrels on her poop and the shouting of
the black crowd who fringed the yellow beach. To the left lay the green
Island of Wight, with its long, low, curving hills peeping over each
other's shoulders to the sky-line; to the right the wooded Hampshire
coast as far as eye could reach; above a steel-blue heaven, with a
wintry sun shimmering down upon them, and enough of frost to set the
breath a-smoking.

�By St. Paul!� said Sir Nigel gayly, as he stood upon the poop and
looked on either side of him, �it is a land which is very well worth
fighting for, and it were pity to go to France for what may be had at
home. Did you not spy a crooked man upon the beach?�

�Nay, I spied nothing,� grumbled Sir Oliver, �for I was hurried down
with a clam stuck in my gizzard and an untasted goblet of Cyprus on the
board behind me.�

�I saw him, my fair lord,� said Terlake, �an old man with one shoulder
higher than the other.�

�'Tis a sign of good fortune,� quoth Sir Nigel. �Our path was also
crossed by a woman and by a priest, so all should be well with us. What
say you, Edricson?�

�I cannot tell, my fair lord. The Romans of old were a very wise people,
yet, certes, they placed their faith in such matters. So, too, did
the Greeks, and divers other ancient peoples who were famed for their
learning. Yet of the moderns there are many who scoff at all omens.�

�There can be no manner of doubt about it,� said Sir Oliver Buttesthorn.
�I can well remember that in Navarre one day it thundered on the left
out of a cloudless sky. We knew that ill would come of it, nor had we
long to wait. Only thirteen days after, a haunch of prime venison was
carried from my very tent door by the wolves, and on the same day two
flasks of old vernage turned sour and muddy.�

�You may bring my harness from below,� said Sir Nigel to his squires,
�and also, I pray you, bring up Sir Oliver's and we shall don it here.
Ye may then see to your own gear; for this day you will, I hope, make a
very honorable entrance into the field of chivalry, and prove yourselves
to be very worthy and valiant squires. And now, Sir Oliver, as to our
dispositions: would it please you that I should order them or will you?�

�You, my cockerel, you. By Our Lady! I am no chicken, but I cannot claim
to know as much of war as the squire of Sir Walter Manny. Settle the
matter to your own liking.�

�You shall fly your pennon upon the fore part, then, and I upon the
poop. For foreguard I shall give you your own forty men, with two-score
archers. Two-score men, with my own men-at-arms and squires, will serve
as a poop-guard. Ten archers, with thirty shipmen, under the master, may
hold the waist while ten lie aloft with stones and arbalests. How like
you that?�

�Good, by my faith, good! But here comes my harness, and I must to work,
for I cannot slip into it as I was wont when first I set my face to the
wars.�

Meanwhile there had been bustle and preparation in all parts of the
great vessel. The archers stood in groups about the decks, new-stringing
their bows, and testing that they were firm at the nocks. Among them
moved Aylward and other of the older soldiers, with a few whispered
words of precept here and of warning there.

�Stand to it, my hearts of gold,� said the old bowman as he passed from
knot to knot. �By my hilt! we are in luck this journey. Bear in mind the
old saying of the Company.�

�What is that, Aylward?� cried several, leaning on their bows and
laughing at him.

�'Tis the master-bowyer's rede: 'Every bow well bent. Every shaft well
sent. Every stave well nocked. Every string well locked.' There, with
that jingle in his head, a bracer on his left hand, a shooting glove on
his right, and a farthing's-worth of wax in his girdle, what more doth a
bowman need?�

�It would not be amiss,� said Hordle John, �if under his girdle he had
four farthings'-worth of wine.�

�Work first, wine afterwards, mon camarade. But it is time that we
took our order, for methinks that between the Needle rocks and the Alum
cliffs yonder I can catch a glimpse of the topmasts of the galleys.
Hewett, Cook, Johnson, Cunningham, your men are of the poop-guard.
Thornbury, Walters, Hackett, Baddlesmere, you are with Sir Oliver on the
forecastle. Simon, you bide with your lord's banner; but ten men must go
forward.�

Quietly and promptly the men took their places, lying flat upon their
faces on the deck, for such was Sir Nigel's order. Near the prow was
planted Sir Oliver's spear, with his arms--a boar's head gules upon a
field of gold. Close by the stern stood Black Simon with the pennon of
the house of Loring. In the waist gathered the Southampton mariners,
hairy and burly men, with their jerkins thrown off, their waists braced
tight, swords, mallets, and pole-axes in their hands. Their leader,
Goodwin Hawtayne, stood upon the poop and talked with Sir Nigel, casting
his eye up sometimes at the swelling sail, and then glancing back at the
two seamen who held the tiller.

�Pass the word,� said Sir Nigel, �that no man shall stand to arms or
draw his bow-string until my trumpeter shall sound. It would be well
that we should seem to be a merchant-ship from Southampton and appear to
flee from them.�

�We shall see them anon,� said the master-shipman. �Ha, said I not so?
There they lie, the water-snakes, in Freshwater Bay; and mark the reek
of smoke from yonder point, where they have been at their devil's work.
See how their shallops pull from the land! They have seen us and called
their men aboard. Now they draw upon the anchor. See them like ants upon
the forecastle! They stoop and heave like handy ship men. But, my fair
lord, these are no niefs. I doubt but we have taken in hand more than
we can do. Each of these ships is a galeasse, and of the largest and
swiftest make.�

�I would I had your eyes,� said Sir Nigel, blinking at the pirate
galleys. �They seem very gallant ships, and I trust that we shall have
much pleasance from our meeting with them. It would be well to pass the
word that we should neither give nor take quarter this day. Have you
perchance a priest or friar aboard this ship, Master Hawtayne?�

�No, my fair lord.�

�Well, well, it is no great matter for my Company, for they were all
houseled and shriven ere we left Twynham Castle; and Father Christopher
of the Priory gave me his word that they were as fit to march to heaven
as to Gascony. But my mind misdoubts me as to these Winchester men who
have come with Sir Oliver, for they appear to be a very ungodly crew.
Pass the word that the men kneel, and that the under-officers repeat to
them the pater, the ave, and the credo.�

With a clank of arms, the rough archers and seamen took to their knees,
with bent heads and crossed hands, listening to the hoarse mutter from
the file-leaders. It was strange to mark the hush; so that the lapping
of the water, the straining of the sail, and the creaking of the timbers
grew louder of a sudden upon the ear. Many of the bowmen had drawn
amulets and relics from their bosoms, while he who possessed some
more than usually sanctified treasure passed it down the line of his
comrades, that all might kiss and reap the virtue.

The yellow cog had now shot out from the narrow waters of the Solent,
and was plunging and rolling on the long heave of the open channel. The
wind blew freshly from the east, with a very keen edge to it; and the
great sail bellied roundly out, laying the vessel over until the water
hissed beneath her lee bulwarks. Broad and ungainly, she floundered from
wave to wave, dipping her round bows deeply into the blue rollers, and
sending the white flakes of foam in a spatter over her decks. On her
larboard quarter lay the two dark galleys, which had already hoisted
sail, and were shooting out from Freshwater Bay in swift pursuit, their
double line of oars giving them a vantage which could not fail to bring
them up with any vessel which trusted to sails alone. High and bluff the
English cog; long, black and swift the pirate galleys, like two fierce
lean wolves which have seen a lordly and unsuspecting stag walk past
their forest lair.

�Shall we turn, my fair lord, or shall we carry on?� asked the
master-shipman, looking behind him with anxious eyes.

�Nay, we must carry on and play the part of the helpless merchant.�

�But your pennons? They will see that we have two knights with us.�

�Yet it would not be to a knight's honor or good name to lower his
pennon. Let them be, and they will think that we are a wine-ship for
Gascony, or that we bear the wool-bales of some mercer of the Staple. Ma
foi, but they are very swift! They swoop upon us like two goshawks on a
heron. Is there not some symbol or device upon their sails?�

�That on the right,� said Edricson, �appears to have the head of an
Ethiop upon it.�

�'Tis the badge of Tete-noire, the Norman,� cried a seaman-mariner. �I
have seen it before, when he harried us at Winchelsea. He is a wondrous
large and strong man, with no ruth for man, woman, or beast. They say
that he hath the strength of six; and, certes, he hath the crimes of six
upon his soul. See, now, to the poor souls who swing at either end of
his yard-arm!�

At each end of the yard there did indeed hang the dark figure of a man,
jolting and lurching with hideous jerkings of its limbs at every plunge
and swoop of the galley.

�By St. Paul!� said Sir Nigel, �and by the help of St. George and Our
Lady, it will be a very strange thing if our black-headed friend does
not himself swing thence ere he be many hours older. But what is that
upon the other galley?�

�It is the red cross of Genoa. This Spade-beard is a very noted captain,
and it is his boast that there are no seamen and no archers in the world
who can compare with those who serve the Doge Boccanegra.�

�That we shall prove,� said Goodwin Hawtayne; �but it would be well,
ere they close with us, to raise up the mantlets and pavises as a screen
against their bolts.� He shouted a hoarse order, and his seamen worked
swiftly and silently, heightening the bulwarks and strengthening them.
The three ship's anchors were at Sir Nigel's command carried into the
waist, and tied to the mast, with twenty feet of cable between, each
under the care of four seamen. Eight others were stationed with leather
water-bags to quench any fire-arrows which might come aboard, while
others were sent up the mast, to lie along the yard and drop stones or
shoot arrows as the occasion served.

�Let them be supplied with all that is heavy and weighty in the ship,�
 said Sir Nigel.

�Then we must send them up Sir Oliver Buttesthorn,� quoth Ford.

The knight looked at him with a face which struck the smile from his
lips. �No squire of mine,� he said, �shall ever make jest of a belted
knight. And yet,� he added, his eyes softening, �I know that it is but
a boy's mirth, with no sting in it. Yet I should ill do my part towards
your father if I did not teach you to curb your tongue-play.�

�They will lay us aboard on either quarter, my lord,� cried the master.
�See how they stretch out from each other! The Norman hath a mangonel
or a trabuch upon the forecastle. See, they bend to the levers! They are
about to loose it.�

�Aylward,� cried the knight, �pick your three trustiest archers, and see
if you cannot do something to hinder their aim. Methinks they are within
long arrow flight.�

�Seventeen score paces,� said the archer, running his eye backwards and
forwards. �By my ten finger-bones! it would be a strange thing if we
could not notch a mark at that distance. Here, Watkin of Sowley, Arnold,
Long Williams, let us show the rogues that they have English bowmen to
deal with.�

The three archers named stood at the further end of the poop, balancing
themselves with feet widely spread and bows drawn, until the heads of
the cloth-yard arrows were level with the centre of the stave. �You
are the surer, Watkin,� said Aylward, standing by them with shaft upon
string. �Do you take the rogue with the red coif. You two bring down the
man with the head-piece, and I will hold myself ready if you miss. Ma
foi! they are about to loose her. Shoot, mes garcons, or you will be too
late.�

The throng of pirates had cleared away from the great wooden catapult,
leaving two of their number to discharge it. One in a scarlet cap
bent over it, steadying the jagged rock which was balanced on the
spoon-shaped end of the long wooden lever. The other held the loop of
the rope which would release the catch and send the unwieldy missile
hurtling through the air. So for an instant they stood, showing hard and
clear against the white sail behind them. The next, redcap had fallen
across the stone with an arrow between his ribs; and the other, struck
in the leg and in the throat, was writhing and spluttering upon the
ground. As he toppled backwards he had loosed the spring, and the huge
beam of wood, swinging round with tremendous force, cast the corpse of
his comrade so close to the English ship that its mangled and distorted
limbs grazed their very stern. As to the stone, it glanced off obliquely
and fell midway between the vessels. A roar of cheering and of laughter
broke from the rough archers and seamen at the sight, answered by a yell
of rage from their pursuers.

�Lie low, mes enfants,� cried Aylward, motioning with his left hand.
�They will learn wisdom. They are bringing forward shield and mantlet.
We shall have some pebbles about our ears ere long.�



CHAPTER XVI. HOW THE YELLOW COG FOUGHT THE TWO ROVER GALLEYS.


The three vessels had been sweeping swiftly westwards, the cog still
well to the front, although the galleys were slowly drawing in upon
either quarter. To the left was a hard skyline unbroken by a sail. The
island already lay like a cloud behind them, while right in front
was St. Alban's Head, with Portland looming mistily in the farthest
distance. Alleyne stood by the tiller, looking backwards, the fresh wind
full in his teeth, the crisp winter air tingling on his face and blowing
his yellow curls from under his bassinet. His cheeks were flushed and
his eyes shining, for the blood of a hundred fighting Saxon ancestors
was beginning to stir in his veins.

�What was that?� he asked, as a hissing, sharp-drawn voice seemed to
whisper in his ear. The steersman smiled, and pointed with his foot to
where a short heavy cross-bow quarrel stuck quivering in the boards.
At the same instant the man stumbled forward upon his knees, and lay
lifeless upon the deck, a blood-stained feather jutting out from his
back. As Alleyne stooped to raise him, the air seemed to be alive with
the sharp zip-zip of the bolts, and he could hear them pattering on the
deck like apples at a tree-shaking.

�Raise two more mantlets by the poop-lanthorn,� said Sir Nigel quietly.

�And another man to the tiller,� cried the master-shipman.

�Keep them in play, Aylward, with ten of your men,� the knight
continued. �And let ten of Sir Oliver's bowmen do as much for the
Genoese. I have no mind as yet to show them how much they have to fear
from us.�

Ten picked shots under Aylward stood in line across the broad deck, and
it was a lesson to the young squires who had seen nothing of war to note
how orderly and how cool were these old soldiers, how quick the command,
and how prompt the carrying out, ten moving like one. Their comrades
crouched beneath the bulwarks, with many a rough jest and many a scrap
of criticism or advice. �Higher, Wat, higher!� �Put thy body into it,
Will!� �Forget not the wind, Hal!� So ran the muttered chorus, while
high above it rose the sharp twanging of the strings, the hiss of the
shafts, and the short �Draw your arrow! Nick your arrow! Shoot wholly
together!� from the master-bowman.

And now both mangonels were at work from the galleys, but so covered
and protected that, save at the moment of discharge, no glimpse could
be caught of them. A huge brown rock from the Genoese sang over their
heads, and plunged sullenly into the slope of a wave. Another from the
Norman whizzed into the waist, broke the back of a horse, and crashed
its way through the side of the vessel. Two others, flying together,
tore a great gap in the St. Christopher upon the sail, and brushed three
of Sir Oliver's men-at-arms from the forecastle. The master-shipman
looked at the knight with a troubled face.

�They keep their distance from us,� said he. �Our archery is over-good,
and they will not close. What defence can we make against the stones?�

�I think I may trick them,� the knight answered cheerfully, and passed
his order to the archers. Instantly five of them threw up their hands
and fell prostrate upon the deck. One had already been slain by a bolt,
so that there were but four upon their feet.

�That should give them heart,� said Sir Nigel, eyeing the galleys, which
crept along on either side, with a slow, measured swing of their great
oars, the water swirling and foaming under their sharp stems.

�They still hold aloof,� cried Hawtayne.

�Then down with two more,� shouted their leader. �That will do. Ma foi!
but they come to our lure like chicks to the fowler. To your arms, men!
The pennon behind me, and the squires round the pennon. Stand fast with
the anchors in the waist, and be ready for a cast. Now blow out the
trumpets, and may God's benison be with the honest men!�

As he spoke a roar of voices and a roll of drums came from either
galley, and the water was lashed into spray by the hurried beat of a
hundred oars. Down they swooped, one on the right, one on the left, the
sides and shrouds black with men and bristling with weapons. In heavy
clusters they hung upon the forecastle all ready for a spring--faces
white, faces brown, faces yellow, and faces black, fair Norsemen,
swarthy Italians, fierce rovers from the Levant, and fiery Moors from
the Barbary States, of all hues and countries, and marked solely by the
common stamp of a wild-beast ferocity. Rasping up on either side,
with oars trailing to save them from snapping, they poured in a
living torrent with horrid yell and shrill whoop upon the defenceless
merchantman.

But wilder yet was the cry, and shriller still the scream, when there
rose up from the shadow of those silent bulwarks the long lines of
the English bowmen, and the arrows whizzed in a deadly sleet among the
unprepared masses upon the pirate decks. From the higher sides of the
cog the bowmen could shoot straight down, at a range which was so short
as to enable a cloth-yard shaft to pierce through mail-coats or to
transfix a shield, though it were an inch thick of toughened wood.
One moment Alleyne saw the galley's poop crowded with rushing figures,
waving arms, exultant faces; the next it was a blood-smeared shambles,
with bodies piled three deep upon each other, the living cowering behind
the dead to shelter themselves from that sudden storm-blast of death.
On either side the seamen whom Sir Nigel had chosen for the purpose
had cast their anchors over the side of the galleys, so that the three
vessels, locked in an iron grip, lurched heavily forward upon the swell.

And now set in a fell and fierce fight, one of a thousand of which no
chronicler has spoken and no poet sung. Through all the centuries and
over all those southern waters nameless men have fought in nameless
places, their sole monuments a protected coast and an unravaged
country-side.

Fore and aft the archers had cleared the galleys' decks, but from either
side the rovers had poured down into the waist, where the seamen and
bowmen were pushed back and so mingled with their foes that it was
impossible for their comrades above to draw string to help them. It
was a wild chaos where axe and sword rose and fell, while Englishman,
Norman, and Italian staggered and reeled on a deck which was cumbered
with bodies and slippery with blood. The clang of blows, the cries of
the stricken, the short, deep shout of the islanders, and the fierce
whoops of the rovers, rose together in a deafening tumult, while the
breath of the panting men went up in the wintry air like the smoke from
a furnace. The giant Tete-noire, towering above his fellows and clad
from head to foot in plate of proof, led on his boarders, waving a
huge mace in the air, with which he struck to the deck every man who
approached him. On the other side, Spade-beard, a dwarf in height, but
of great breadth of shoulder and length of arm, had cut a road almost
to the mast, with three-score Genoese men-at-arms close at his heels.
Between these two formidable assailants the seamen were being slowly
wedged more closely together, until they stood back to back under the
mast with the rovers raging upon every side of them.

But help was close at hand. Sir Oliver Buttesthorn with his men-at-arms
had swarmed down from the forecastle, while Sir Nigel, with his three
squires, Black Simon, Aylward, Hordle John, and a score more, threw
themselves from the poop and hurled themselves into the thickest of the
fight. Alleyne, as in duty bound, kept his eyes fixed ever on his
lord and pressed forward close at his heels. Often had he heard of Sir
Nigel's prowess and skill with all knightly weapons, but all the tales
that had reached his ears fell far short of the real quickness and
coolness of the man. It was as if the devil was in him, for he sprang
here and sprang there, now thrusting and now cutting, catching blows on
his shield, turning them with his blade, stooping under the swing of an
axe, springing over the sweep of a sword, so swift and so erratic that
the man who braced himself for a blow at him might find him six paces
off ere he could bring it down. Three pirates had fallen before him, and
he had wounded Spade-beard in the neck, when the Norman giant sprang at
him from the side with a slashing blow from his deadly mace. Sir Nigel
stooped to avoid it, and at the same instant turned a thrust from the
Genoese swordsman, but, his foot slipping in a pool of blood, he fell
heavily to the ground. Alleyne sprang in front of the Norman, but his
sword was shattered and he himself beaten to the ground by a second
blow from the ponderous weapon. Ere the pirate chief could repeat it,
however, John's iron grip fell upon his wrist, and he found that for
once he was in the hands of a stronger man than himself.

Fiercely he strove to disengage his weapon, but Hordle John bent his arm
slowly back until, with a sharp crack, like a breaking stave, it turned
limp in his grasp, and the mace dropped from the nerveless fingers. In
vain he tried to pluck it up with the other hand. Back and back still
his foeman bent him, until, with a roar of pain and of fury, the giant
clanged his full length upon the boards, while the glimmer of a knife
before the bars of his helmet warned him that short would be his shrift
if he moved.

Cowed and disheartened by the loss of their leader, the Normans had
given back and were now streaming over the bulwarks on to their own
galley, dropping a dozen at a time on to her deck. But the anchor still
held them in its crooked claw, and Sir Oliver with fifty men was hard
upon their heels. Now, too, the archers had room to draw their bows
once more, and great stones from the yard of the cog came thundering and
crashing among the flying rovers. Here and there they rushed with wild
screams and curses, diving under the sail, crouching behind booms,
huddling into corners like rabbits when the ferrets are upon them,
as helpless and as hopeless. They were stern days, and if the honest
soldier, too poor for a ransom, had no prospect of mercy upon the
battle-field, what ruth was there for sea robbers, the enemies of
humankind, taken in the very deed, with proofs of their crimes still
swinging upon their yard-arm.

But the fight had taken a new and a strange turn upon the other side.
Spade-beard and his men had given slowly back, hard pressed by Sir
Nigel, Aylward, Black Simon, and the poop-guard. Foot by foot the
Italian had retreated, his armor running blood at every joint, his
shield split, his crest shorn, his voice fallen away to a mere gasping
and croaking. Yet he faced his foemen with dauntless courage, dashing
in, springing back, sure-footed, steady-handed, with a point which
seemed to menace three at once. Beaten back on to the deck of his
own vessel, and closely followed by a dozen Englishmen, he disengaged
himself from them, ran swiftly down the deck, sprang back into the
cog once more, cut the rope which held the anchor, and was back in an
instant among his crossbow-men. At the same time the Genoese sailors
thrust with their oars against the side of the cog, and a rapidly
widening rift appeared between the two vessels.

�By St. George!� cried Ford, �we are cut off from Sir Nigel.�

�He is lost,� gasped Terlake. �Come, let us spring for it.� The two
youths jumped with all their strength to reach the departing galley.
Ford's feet reached the edge of the bulwarks, and his hand clutching a
rope he swung himself on board. Terlake fell short, crashed in among the
oars, and bounded off into the sea. Alleyne, staggering to the side, was
about to hurl himself after him, but Hordle John dragged him back by the
girdle.

�You can scarce stand, lad, far less jump,� said he. �See how the blood
rips from your bassinet.�

�My place is by the flag,� cried Alleyne, vainly struggling to break
from the other's hold.

�Bide here, man. You would need wings ere you could reach Sir Nigel's
side.�

The vessels were indeed so far apart now that the Genoese could use the
full sweep of their oars, and draw away rapidly from the cog.

�My God, but it is a noble fight!� shouted big John, clapping his
hands. �They have cleared the poop, and they spring into the waist. Well
struck, my lord! Well struck, Aylward! See to Black Simon, how he storms
among the shipmen! But this Spade-beard is a gallant warrior. He rallies
his men upon the forecastle. He hath slain an archer. Ha! my lord is
upon him. Look to it, Alleyne! See to the whirl and glitter of it!�

�By heaven, Sir Nigel is down!� cried the squire.

�Up!� roared John. �It was but a feint. He bears him back. He drives
him to the side. Ah, by Our Lady, his sword is through him! They cry for
mercy. Down goes the red cross, and up springs Simon with the scarlet
roses!�

The death of the Genoese leader did indeed bring the resistance to an
end. Amid a thunder of cheering from cog and from galleys the forked
pennon fluttered upon the forecastle, and the galley, sweeping round,
came slowly back, as the slaves who rowed it learned the wishes of their
new masters.

The two knights had come aboard the cog, and the grapplings having been
thrown off, the three vessels now moved abreast. Through all the storm
and rush of the fight Alleyne had been aware of the voice of Goodwin
Hawtayne, the master-shipman, with his constant �Hale the bowline!
Veer the sheet!� and strange it was to him to see how swiftly the
blood-stained sailors turned from the strife to the ropes and back. Now
the cog's head was turned Francewards, and the shipman walked the deck,
a peaceful master-mariner once more.

�There is sad scath done to the cog, Sir Nigel,� said he. �Here is a
hole in the side two ells across, the sail split through the centre,
and the wood as bare as a friar's poll. In good sooth, I know not what I
shall say to Master Witherton when I see the Itchen once more.�

�By St. Paul! it would be a very sorry thing if we suffered you to be
the worse of this day's work,� said Sir Nigel. �You shall take these
galleys back with you, and Master Witherton may sell them. Then from the
moneys he shall take as much as may make good the damage, and the rest
he shall keep until our home-coming, when every man shall have his
share. An image of silver fifteen inches high I have vowed to the
Virgin, to be placed in her chapel within the Priory, for that she was
pleased to allow me to come upon this Spade-beard, who seemed to me from
what I have seen of him to be a very sprightly and valiant gentleman.
But how fares it with you, Edricson?�

�It is nothing, my fair lord,� said Alleyne, who had now loosened his
bassinet, which was cracked across by the Norman's blow. Even as he
spoke, however, his head swirled round, and he fell to the deck with the
blood gushing from his nose and mouth.

�He will come to anon,� said the knight, stooping over him and passing
his fingers through his hair. �I have lost one very valiant and gentle
squire this day. I can ill afford to lose another. How many men have
fallen?�

�I have pricked off the tally,� said Aylward, who had come aboard with
his lord. �There are seven of the Winchester men, eleven seamen, your
squire, young Master Terlake, and nine archers.�

�And of the others?�

�They are all dead--save only the Norman knight who stands behind you.
What would you that we should do with him?�

�He must hang on his own yard,� said Sir Nigel. �It was my vow and must
be done.�

The pirate leader had stood by the bulwarks, a cord round his arms,
and two stout archers on either side. At Sir Nigel's words he started
violently, and his swarthy features blanched to a livid gray.

�How, Sir Knight?� he cried in broken English. �Que dites vous? To hang,
le mort du chien! To hang!�

�It is my vow,� said Sir Nigel shortly. �From what I hear, you thought
little enough of hanging others.�

�Peasants, base roturiers,� cried the other. �It is their fitting death.
Mais Le Seigneur d'Andelys, avec le sang des rois dans ses veins! C'est
incroyable!�

Sir Nigel turned upon his heel, while two seamen cast a noose over the
pirate's neck. At the touch of the cord he snapped the bonds which bound
him, dashed one of the archers to the deck, and seizing the other round
the waist sprang with him into the sea.

�By my hilt, he is gone!� cried Aylward, rushing to the side. �They have
sunk together like a stone.�

�I am right glad of it,� answered Sir Nigel; �for though it was against
my vow to loose him, I deem that he has carried himself like a very
gentle and debonnaire cavalier.�



CHAPTER XVII. HOW THE YELLOW COG CROSSED THE BAR OF GIRONDE.


For two days the yellow cog ran swiftly before a northeasterly wind, and
on the dawn of the third the high land of Ushant lay like a mist upon
the shimmering sky-line. There came a plump of rain towards mid-day
and the breeze died down, but it freshened again before nightfall, and
Goodwin Hawtayne veered his sheet and held head for the south. Next
morning they had passed Belle Isle, and ran through the midst of a fleet
of transports returning from Guienne. Sir Nigel Loring and Sir Oliver
Buttesthorn at once hung their shields over the side, and displayed
their pennons as was the custom, noting with the keenest interest the
answering symbols which told the names of the cavaliers who had been
constrained by ill health or wounds to leave the prince at so critical a
time.

That evening a great dun-colored cloud banked up in the west, and an
anxious man was Goodwin Hawtayne, for a third part of his crew had been
slain, and half the remainder were aboard the galleys, so that, with
an injured ship, he was little fit to meet such a storm as sweeps over
those waters. All night it blew in short fitful puffs, heeling the great
cog over until the water curled over her lee bulwarks. As the wind still
freshened the yard was lowered half way down the mast in the morning.
Alleyne, wretchedly ill and weak, with his head still ringing from
the blow which he had received, crawled up upon deck. Water-swept and
aslant, it was preferable to the noisome, rat-haunted dungeons which
served as cabins. There, clinging to the stout halliards of the sheet,
he gazed with amazement at the long lines of black waves, each with
its curling ridge of foam, racing in endless succession from out the
inexhaustible west. A huge sombre cloud, flecked with livid blotches,
stretched over the whole seaward sky-line, with long ragged streamers
whirled out in front of it. Far behind them the two galleys labored
heavily, now sinking between the rollers until their yards were level
with the waves, and again shooting up with a reeling, scooping motion
until every spar and rope stood out hard against the sky. On the left
the low-lying land stretched in a dim haze, rising here and there into
a darker blur which marked the higher capes and headlands. The land
of France! Alleyne's eyes shone as he gazed upon it. The land of
France!--the very words sounded as the call of a bugle in the ears of
the youth of England. The land where their fathers had bled, the home of
chivalry and of knightly deeds, the country of gallant men, of courtly
women, of princely buildings, of the wise, the polished and the sainted.
There it lay, so still and gray beneath the drifting wrack--the home of
things noble and of things shameful--the theatre where a new name
might be made or an old one marred. From his bosom to his lips came the
crumpled veil, and he breathed a vow that if valor and goodwill could
raise him to his lady's side, then death alone should hold him back from
her. His thoughts were still in the woods of Minstead and the old armory
of Twynham Castle, when the hoarse voice of the master-shipman brought
them back once more to the Bay of Biscay.

�By my troth, young sir,� he said, �you are as long in the face as the
devil at a christening, and I cannot marvel at it, for I have sailed
these waters since I was as high as this whinyard, and yet I never saw
more sure promise of an evil night.�

�Nay, I had other things upon my mind,� the squire answered.

�And so has every man,� cried Hawtayne in an injured voice. �Let the
shipman see to it. It is the master-shipman's affair. Put it all upon
good Master Hawtayne! Never had I so much care since first I blew
trumpet and showed cartel at the west gate of Southampton.�

�What is amiss then?� asked Alleyne, for the man's words were as gusty
as the weather.

�Amiss, quotha? Here am I with but half my mariners, and a hole in the
ship where that twenty-devil stone struck us big enough to fit the fat
widow of Northam through. It is well enough on this tack, but I would
have you tell me what I am to do on the other. We are like to have
salt water upon us until we be found pickled like the herrings in an
Easterling's barrels.�

�What says Sir Nigel to it?�

�He is below pricking out the coat-armor of his mother's uncle. 'Pester
me not with such small matters!' was all that I could get from him. Then
there is Sir Oliver. 'Fry them in oil with a dressing of Gascony,' quoth
he, and then swore at me because I had not been the cook. 'Walawa,'
thought I, 'mad master, sober man'--so away forward to the archers.
Harrow and alas! but they were worse than the others.�

�Would they not help you then?�

�Nay, they sat tway and tway at a board, him that they call Aylward
and the great red-headed man who snapped the Norman's arm-bone, and the
black man from Norwich, and a score of others, rattling their dice in
an archer's gauntlet for want of a box. 'The ship can scarce last much
longer, my masters,' quoth I. 'That is your business, old swine's-head,'
cried the black galliard. 'Le diable t'emporte,' says Aylward. 'A five,
a four and the main,' shouted the big man, with a voice like the flap of
a sail. Hark to them now, young sir, and say if I speak not sooth.�

As he spoke, there sounded high above the shriek of the gale and the
straining of the timbers a gust of oaths with a roar of deep-chested
mirth from the gamblers in the forecastle.

�Can I be of avail?� asked Alleyne. �Say the word and the thing is done,
if two hands may do it.�

�Nay, nay, your head I can see is still totty, and i' faith little head
would you have, had your bassinet not stood your friend. All that may be
done is already carried out, for we have stuffed the gape with sails and
corded it without and within. Yet when we bale our bowline and veer the
sheet our lives will hang upon the breach remaining blocked. See how
yonder headland looms upon us through the mist! We must tack within
three arrow flights, or we may find a rock through our timbers. Now, St.
Christopher be praised! here is Sir Nigel, with whom I may confer.�

�I prythee that you will pardon me,� said the knight, clutching his way
along the bulwark. �I would not show lack of courtesy toward a worthy
man, but I was deep in a matter of some weight, concerning which,
Alleyne, I should be glad of your rede. It touches the question of
dimidiation or impalement in the coat of mine uncle, Sir John Leighton
of Shropshire, who took unto wife the widow of Sir Henry Oglander
of Nunwell. The case has been much debated by pursuivants and
kings-of-arms. But how is it with you, master shipman?�

�Ill enough, my fair lord. The cog must go about anon, and I know not
how we may keep the water out of her.�

�Go call Sir Oliver!� said Sir Nigel, and presently the portly knight
made his way all astraddle down the slippery deck.

�By my soul, master-shipman, this passes all patience!� he cried
wrathfully. �If this ship of yours must needs dance and skip like a
clown at a kermesse, then I pray you that you will put me into one
of these galeasses. I had but sat down to a flask of malvoisie and a
mortress of brawn, as is my use about this hour, when there comes a
cherking, and I find my wine over my legs and the flask in my lap, and
then as I stoop to clip it there comes another cursed cherk, and there
is a mortress of brawn stuck fast to the nape of my neck. At this moment
I have two pages coursing after it from side to side, like hounds behind
a leveret. Never did living pig gambol more lightly. But you have sent
for me, Sir Nigel?�

�I would fain have your rede, Sir Oliver, for Master Hawtayne hath fears
that when we veer there may come danger from the hole in our side.�

�Then do not veer,� quoth Sir Oliver hastily. �And now, fair sir, I must
hasten back to see how my rogues have fared with the brawn.�

�Nay, but this will scarce suffice,� cried the shipman. �If we do not
veer we will be upon the rocks within the hour.�

�Then veer,� said Sir Oliver. �There is my rede; and now, Sir Nigel, I
must crave----�

At this instant, however, a startled shout rang out from two seamen upon
the forecastle. �Rocks!� they yelled, stabbing into the air with their
forefingers. �Rocks beneath our very bows!� Through the belly of a great
black wave, not one hundred paces to the front of them, there thrust
forth a huge jagged mass of brown stone, which spouted spray as though
it were some crouching monster, while a dull menacing boom and roar
filled the air.

�Yare! yare!� screamed Goodwin Hawtayne, flinging himself upon the long
pole which served as a tiller. �Cut the halliard! Haul her over! Lay her
two courses to the wind!�

Over swung the great boom, and the cog trembled and quivered within five
spear-lengths of the breakers.

�She can scarce draw clear,� cried Hawtayne, with his eyes from the sail
to the seething line of foam. �May the holy Julian stand by us and the
thrice-sainted Christopher!�

�If there be such peril, Sir Oliver,� quoth Sir Nigel, �it would be
very knightly and fitting that we should show our pennons. I pray you,
Edricson, that you will command my guidon-bearer to put forward my
banner.�

�And sound the trumpets!� cried Sir Oliver. �In manus tuas, Domine! I
am in the keeping of James of Compostella, to whose shrine I shall make
pilgrimage, and in whose honor I vow that I will eat a carp each year
upon his feast-day. Mon Dieu, but the waves roar! How is it with us now,
master-shipman?�

�We draw! We draw!� cried Hawtayne, with his eyes still fixed upon the
foam which hissed under the very bulge of the side. �Ah, Holy Mother, be
with us now!�

As he spoke the cog rasped along the edge of the reef, and a long white
curling sheet of wood was planed off from her side from waist to poop by
a jutting horn of the rock. At the same instant she lay suddenly over,
the sail drew full, and she plunged seawards amid the shoutings of the
seamen and the archers.

�The Virgin be praised!� cried the shipman, wiping his brow. �For this
shall bell swing and candle burn when I see Southampton Water once more.
Cheerily, my hearts! Pull yarely on the bowline!�

�By my soul! I would rather have a dry death,� quoth Sir Oliver.
�Though, Mort Dieu! I have eaten so many fish that it were but justice
that the fish should eat me. Now I must back to the cabin, for I have
matters there which crave my attention.�

�Nay, Sir Oliver, you had best bide with us, and still show your
ensign,� Sir Nigel answered; �for, if I understand the matter aright, we
have but turned from one danger to the other.�

�Good Master Hawtayne,� cried the boatswain, rushing aft, �the water
comes in upon us apace. The waves have driven in the sail wherewith we
strove to stop the hole.� As he spoke the seamen came swarming on to the
poop and the forecastle to avoid the torrent which poured through the
huge leak into the waist. High above the roar of the wind and the clash
of the sea rose the shrill half-human cries of the horses, as they found
the water rising rapidly around them.

�Stop it from without!� cried Hawtayne, seizing the end of the wet sail
with which the gap had been plugged. �Speedily, my hearts, or we are
gone!� Swiftly they rove ropes to the corners, and then, rushing forward
to the bows, they lowered them under the keel, and drew them tight in
such a way that the sail should cover the outer face of the gap. The
force of the rush of water was checked by this obstacle, but it still
squirted plentifully from every side of it. At the sides the horses
were above the belly, and in the centre a man from the poop could scarce
touch the deck with a seven-foot spear. The cog lay lower in the water
and the waves splashed freely over the weather bulwark.

�I fear that we can scarce bide upon this tack,� cried Hawtayne; �and
yet the other will drive us on the rocks.�

�Might we not haul down sail and wait for better times?� suggested Sir
Nigel.

�Nay, we should drift upon the rocks. Thirty years have I been on the
sea, and never yet in greater straits. Yet we are in the hands of the
Saints.�

�Of whom,� cried Sir Oliver, �I look more particularly to St. James of
Compostella, who hath already befriended us this day, and on whose feast
I hereby vow that I shall eat a second carp, if he will but interpose a
second time.�

The wrack had thickened to seaward, and the coast was but a blurred
line. Two vague shadows in the offing showed where the galeasses rolled
and tossed upon the great Atlantic rollers. Hawtayne looked wistfully in
their direction.

�If they would but lie closer we might find safety, even should the cog
founder. You will bear me out with good Master Witherton of Southampton
that I have done all that a shipman might. It would be well that you
should doff camail and greaves, Sir Nigel, for, by the black rood! it is
like enough that we shall have to swim for it.�

�Nay,� said the little knight, �it would be scarce fitting that a
cavalier should throw off his harness for the fear of every puff of wind
and puddle of water. I would rather that my Company should gather round
me here on the poop, where we might abide together whatever God may be
pleased to send. But, certes, Master Hawtayne, for all that my sight
is none of the best, it is not the first time that I have seen that
headland upon the left.�

The seaman shaded his eyes with his hand, and gazed earnestly through
the haze and spray. Suddenly he threw up his arms and shouted aloud in
his joy.

�'Tis the point of La Tremblade!� he cried. �I had not thought that we
were as far as Oleron. The Gironde lies before us, and once over the
bar, and under shelter of the Tour de Cordouan, all will be well with
us. Veer again, my hearts, and bring her to try with the main course!�

The sail swung round once more, and the cog, battered and torn and
well-nigh water-logged, staggered in for this haven of refuge. A bluff
cape to the north and a long spit to the south marked the mouth of the
noble river, with a low-lying island of silted sand in the centre, all
shrouded and curtained by the spume of the breakers. A line of broken
water traced the dangerous bar, which in clear day and balmy weather has
cracked the back of many a tall ship.

�There is a channel,� said Hawtayne, �which was shown to me by the
Prince's own pilot. Mark yonder tree upon the bank, and see the tower
which rises behind it. If these two be held in a line, even as we hold
them now, it may be done, though our ship draws two good ells more than
when she put forth.�

�God speed you, Master Hawtayne!� cried Sir Oliver. �Twice have we come
scathless out of peril, and now for the third time I commend me to the
blessed James of Compostella, to whom I vow----�

�Nay, nay, old friend,� whispered Sir Nigel. �You are like to bring a
judgment upon us with these vows, which no living man could accomplish.
Have I not already heard you vow to eat two carp in one day, and now you
would venture upon a third?�

�I pray you that you will order the Company to lie down,� cried
Hawtayne, who had taken the tiller and was gazing ahead with a fixed
eye. �In three minutes we shall either be lost or in safety.�

Archers and seamen lay flat upon the deck, waiting in stolid silence for
whatever fate might come. Hawtayne bent his weight upon the tiller, and
crouched to see under the bellying sail. Sir Oliver and Sir Nigel stood
erect with hands crossed in front of the poop. Down swooped the great
cog into the narrow channel which was the portal to safety. On either
bow roared the shallow bar. Right ahead one small lane of black swirling
water marked the pilot's course. But true was the eye and firm the hand
which guided. A dull scraping came from beneath, the vessel quivered
and shook, at the waist, at the quarter, and behind sounded that grim
roaring of the waters, and with a plunge the yellow cog was over the bar
and speeding swiftly up the broad and tranquil estuary of the Gironde.



CHAPTER XVIII. HOW SIR NIGEL LORING PUT A PATCH UPON HIS EYE.


It was on the morning of Friday, the eight-and-twentieth day of
November, two days before the feast of St. Andrew, that the cog and her
two prisoners, after a weary tacking up the Gironde and the Garonne,
dropped anchor at last in front of the noble city of Bordeaux. With
wonder and admiration, Alleyne, leaning over the bulwarks, gazed at the
forest of masts, the swarm of boats darting hither and thither on the
bosom of the broad curving stream, and the gray crescent-shaped city
which stretched with many a tower and minaret along the western shore.
Never had he in his quiet life seen so great a town, nor was there in
the whole of England, save London alone, one which might match it in
size or in wealth. Here came the merchandise of all the fair countries
which are watered by the Garonne and the Dordogne--the cloths of the
south, the skins of Guienne, the wines of the Medoc--to be borne away to
Hull, Exeter, Dartmouth, Bristol or Chester, in exchange for the wools
and woolfels of England. Here too dwelt those famous smelters and
welders who had made the Bordeaux steel the most trusty upon earth, and
could give a temper to lance or to sword which might mean dear life to
its owner. Alleyne could see the smoke of their forges reeking up in the
clear morning air. The storm had died down now to a gentle breeze, which
wafted to his ears the long-drawn stirring bugle-calls which sounded
from the ancient ramparts.

�Hola, mon petit!� said Aylward, coming up to where he stood. �Thou art
a squire now, and like enough to win the golden spurs, while I am still
the master-bowman, and master-bowman I shall bide. I dare scarce wag
my tongue so freely with you as when we tramped together past Wilverley
Chase, else I might be your guide now, for indeed I know every house in
Bordeaux as a friar knows the beads on his rosary.�

�Nay, Aylward,� said Alleyne, laying his hand upon the sleeve of his
companion's frayed jerkin, �you cannot think me so thrall as to throw
aside an old friend because I have had some small share of good fortune.
I take it unkind that you should have thought such evil of me.�

�Nay, mon gar. 'Twas but a flight shot to see if the wind blew steady,
though I were a rogue to doubt it.�

�Why, had I not met you, Aylward, at the Lynhurst inn, who can say where
I had now been! Certes, I had not gone to Twynham Castle, nor become
squire to Sir Nigel, nor met----� He paused abruptly and flushed to his
hair, but the bowman was too busy with his own thoughts to notice his
young companion's embarrassment.

�It was a good hostel, that of the 'Pied Merlin,'� he remarked. �By my
ten finger bones! when I hang bow on nail and change my brigandine for a
tunic, I might do worse than take over the dame and her business.�

�I thought,� said Alleyne, �that you were betrothed to some one at
Christchurch.�

�To three,� Aylward answered moodily, �to three. I fear I may not go
back to Christchurch. I might chance to see hotter service in Hampshire
than I have ever done in Gascony. But mark you now yonder lofty turret
in the centre, which stands back from the river and hath a broad banner
upon the summit. See the rising sun flashes full upon it and sparkles
on the golden lions. 'Tis the royal banner of England, crossed by the
prince's label. There he dwells in the Abbey of St. Andrew, where he
hath kept his court these years back. Beside it is the minster of the
same saint, who hath the town under his very special care.�

�And how of yon gray turret on the left?�

�'Tis the fane of St. Michael, as that upon the right is of St. Remi.
There, too, above the poop of yonder nief, you see the towers of Saint
Croix and of Pey Berland. Mark also the mighty ramparts which are
pierced by the three water-gates, and sixteen others to the landward
side.�

�And how is it, good Aylward, that there comes so much music from the
town? I seem to hear a hundred trumpets, all calling in chorus.�

�It would be strange else, seeing that all the great lords of England
and of Gascony are within the walls, and each would have his trumpeter
blow as loud as his neighbor, lest it might be thought that his dignity
had been abated. Ma foi! they make as much louster as a Scotch army,
where every man fills himself with girdle-cakes, and sits up all night
to blow upon the toodle-pipe. See all along the banks how the pages
water the horses, and there beyond the town how they gallop them over
the plain! For every horse you see a belted knight hath herbergage in
the town, for, as I learn, the men-at-arms and archers have already gone
forward to Dax.�

�I trust, Aylward,� said Sir Nigel, coming upon deck, �that the men are
ready for the land. Go tell them that the boats will be for them within
the hour.�

The archer raised his hand in salute, and hastened forward. In the
meantime Sir Oliver had followed his brother knight, and the two paced
the poop together, Sir Nigel in his plum-colored velvet suit with flat
cap of the same, adorned in front with the Lady Loring's glove and girt
round with a curling ostrich feather. The lusty knight, on the other
hand, was clad in the very latest mode, with cote-hardie, doublet,
pourpoint, court-pie, and paltock of olive-green, picked out with
pink and jagged at the edges. A red chaperon or cap, with long hanging
cornette, sat daintily on the back of his black-curled head, while his
gold-hued shoes were twisted up _a la poulaine_, as though the toes
were shooting forth a tendril which might hope in time to entwine itself
around his massive leg.

�Once more, Sir Oliver,� said Sir Nigel, looking shorewards with
sparkling eyes, �do we find ourselves at the gate of honor, the door
which hath so often led us to all that is knightly and worthy. There
flies the prince's banner, and it would be well that we haste ashore and
pay our obeisance to him. The boats already swarm from the bank.�

�There is a goodly hostel near the west gate, which is famed for the
stewing of spiced pullets,� remarked Sir Oliver. �We might take the edge
of our hunger off ere we seek the prince, for though his tables are
gay with damask and silver he is no trencherman himself, and hath no
sympathy for those who are his betters.�

�His betters!�

�His betters before the tranchoir, lad. Sniff not treason where none is
meant. I have seen him smile in his quiet way because I had looked for
the fourth time towards the carving squire. And indeed to watch
him dallying with a little gobbet of bread, or sipping his cup of
thrice-watered wine, is enough to make a man feel shame at his own
hunger. Yet war and glory, my good friend, though well enough in their
way, will not serve to tighten such a belt as clasps my waist.�

�How read you that coat which hangs over yonder galley, Alleyne?� asked
Sir Nigel.

�Argent, a bend vert between cotises dancette gules.�

�It is a northern coat. I have seen it in the train of the Percies. From
the shields, there is not one of these vessels which hath not knight or
baron aboard. I would mine eyes were better. How read you this upon the
left?�

�Argent and azure, a barry wavy of six.�

�Ha, it is the sign of the Wiltshire Stourtons! And there beyond I see
the red and silver of the Worsleys of Apuldercombe, who like myself are
of Hampshire lineage. Close behind us is the moline cross of the gallant
William Molyneux, and beside it the bloody chevrons of the Norfork
Woodhouses, with the amulets of the Musgraves of Westmoreland. By St.
Paul! it would be a very strange thing if so noble a company were to
gather without some notable deed of arms arising from it. And here is
our boat, Sir Oliver, so it seems best to me that we should go to the
abbey with our squires, leaving Master Hawtayne to have his own way in
the unloading.�

The horses both of knights and squires were speedily lowered into a
broad lighter, and reached the shore almost as soon as their masters.
Sir Nigel bent his knee devoutly as he put foot on land, and taking a
small black patch from his bosom he bound it tightly over his left eye.

�May the blessed George and the memory of my sweet lady-love raise high
my heart!� quoth he. �And as a token I vow that I will not take this
patch from my eye until I have seen something of this country of Spain,
and done such a small deed as it lies in me to do. And this I swear upon
the cross of my sword and upon the glove of my lady.�

�In truth, you take me back twenty years, Nigel,� quoth Sir Oliver, as
they mounted and rode slowly through the water-gate. �After Cadsand,
I deem that the French thought that we were an army of the blind, for
there was scarce a man who had not closed an eye for the greater love
and honor of his lady. Yet it goes hard with you that you should darken
one side, when with both open you can scarce tell a horse from a mule.
In truth, friend, I think that you step over the line of reason in this
matter.�

�Sir Oliver Buttesthorn,� said the little knight shortly, �I would have
you to understand that, blind as I am, I can yet see the path of honor
very clearly, and that that is the road upon which I do not crave
another man's guidance.�

�By my soul,� said Sir Oliver, �you are as tart as verjuice this
morning! If you are bent upon a quarrel with me I must leave you to your
humor and drop into the 'Tete d'Or' here, for I marked a varlet pass
the door who bare a smoking dish, which had, methought, a most excellent
smell.�

�Nenny, nenny,� cried his comrade, laying his hand upon his knee; �we
have known each other over long to fall out, Oliver, like two raw pages
at their first epreuves. You must come with me first to the prince, and
then back to the hostel; though sure I am that it would grieve his heart
that any gentle cavalier should turn from his board to a common tavern.
But is not that my Lord Delewar who waves to us? Ha! my fair lord, God
and Our Lady be with you! And there is Sir Robert Cheney. Good-morrow,
Robert! I am right glad to see you.�

The two knights walked their horses abreast, while Alleyne and Ford,
with John Norbury, who was squire to Sir Oliver, kept some paces behind
them, a spear's-length in front of Black Simon and of the Winchester
guidon-bearer. Norbury, a lean, silent man, had been to those parts
before, and sat his horse with a rigid neck; but the two young squires
gazed eagerly to right or left, and plucked each other's sleeves to call
attention to the many strange things on every side of them.

�See to the brave stalls!� cried Alleyne. �See to the noble armor set
forth, and the costly taffeta--and oh, Ford, see to where the scrivener
sits with the pigments and the ink-horns, and the rolls of sheepskin as
white as the Beaulieu napery! Saw man ever the like before?�

�Nay, man, there are finer stalls in Cheapside,� answered Ford, whose
father had taken him to London on occasion of one of the Smithfield
joustings. �I have seen a silversmith's booth there which would serve to
buy either side of this street. But mark these houses, Alleyne, how they
thrust forth upon the top. And see to the coats-of-arms at every window,
and banner or pensil on the roof.�

�And the churches!� cried Alleyne. �The Priory at Christchurch was a
noble pile, but it was cold and bare, methinks, by one of these, with
their frettings, and their carvings, and their traceries, as though some
great ivy-plant of stone had curled and wantoned over the walls.�

�And hark to the speech of the folk!� said Ford. �Was ever such a
hissing and clacking? I wonder that they have not wit to learn English
now that they have come under the English crown. By Richard of Hampole!
there are fair faces amongst them. See the wench with the brown whimple!
Out on you, Alleyne, that you would rather gaze upon dead stone than on
living flesh!�

It was little wonder that the richness and ornament, not only of church
and of stall, but of every private house as well, should have impressed
itself upon the young squires. The town was now at the height of its
fortunes. Besides its trade and its armorers, other causes had combined
to pour wealth into it. War, which had wrought evil upon so many fair
cities around, had brought nought but good to this one. As her French
sisters decayed she increased, for here, from north, and from east,
and from south, came the plunder to be sold and the ransom money to be
spent. Through all her sixteen landward gates there had set for many
years a double tide of empty-handed soldiers hurrying Francewards, and
of enriched and laden bands who brought their spoils home. The prince's
court, too, with its swarm of noble barons and wealthy knights, many of
whom, in imitation of their master, had brought their ladies and their
children from England, all helped to swell the coffers of the burghers.
Now, with this fresh influx of noblemen and cavaliers, food and lodging
were scarce to be had, and the prince was hurrying forward his forces to
Dax in Gascony to relieve the overcrowding of his capital.

In front of the minster and abbey of St. Andrew's was a large square
crowded with priests, soldiers, women, friars, and burghers, who made it
their common centre for sight-seeing and gossip. Amid the knot of noisy
and gesticulating townsfolk, many small parties of mounted knights and
squires threaded their way towards the prince's quarters, where the
huge iron-clamped doors were thrown back to show that he held audience
within. Two-score archers stood about the gateway, and beat back from
time to time with their bow-staves the inquisitive and chattering crowd
who swarmed round the portal. Two knights in full armor, with lances
raised and closed visors, sat their horses on either side, while in the
centre, with two pages to tend upon him, there stood a noble-faced man
in flowing purple gown, who pricked off upon a sheet of parchment the
style and title of each applicant, marshalling them in their due order,
and giving to each the place and facility which his rank demanded. His
long white beard and searching eyes imparted to him an air of masterful
dignity, which was increased by his tabardlike vesture and the heraldic
barret cap with triple plume which bespoke his office.

�It is Sir William de Pakington, the prince's own herald and scrivener,�
 whispered Sir Nigel, as they pulled up amid the line of knights who
waited admission. �Ill fares it with the man who would venture to
deceive him. He hath by rote the name of every knight of France or of
England; and all the tree of his family, with his kinships, coat-armor,
marriages, augmentations, abatements, and I know not what beside. We
may leave our horses here with the varlets, and push forward with our
squires.�

Following Sir Nigel's counsel, they pressed on upon foot until they were
close to the prince's secretary, who was in high debate with a young and
foppish knight, who was bent upon making his way past him.

�Mackworth!� said the king-at-arms. �It is in my mind, young sir, that
you have not been presented before.�

�Nay, it is but a day since I set foot in Bordeaux, but I feared lest
the prince should think it strange that I had not waited upon him.�

�The prince hath other things to think upon,� quoth Sir William de
Pakington; �but if you be a Mackworth you must be a Mackworth of
Normanton, and indeed I see now that your coat is sable and ermine.�

�I am a Mackworth of Normanton,� the other answered, with some
uneasiness of manner.

�Then you must be Sir Stephen Mackworth, for I learn that when old
Sir Guy died he came in for the arms and the name, the war-cry and the
profit.�

�Sir Stephen is my elder brother, and I am Arthur, the second son,� said
the youth.

�In sooth and in sooth!� cried the king-at-arms with scornful eyes. �And
pray, sir second son, where is the cadency mark which should mark your
rank. Dare you to wear your brother's coat without the crescent which
should stamp you as his cadet. Away to your lodgings, and come not
nigh the prince until the armorer hath placed the true charge upon your
shield.� As the youth withdrew in confusion, Sir William's keen eye
singled out the five red roses from amid the overlapping shields and
cloud of pennons which faced him.

�Ha!� he cried, �there are charges here which are above counterfeit.
The roses of Loring and the boar's head of Buttesthorn may stand back
in peace, but by my faith! they are not to be held back in war. Welcome,
Sir Oliver, Sir Nigel! Chandos will be glad to his very heart-roots when
he sees you. This way, my fair sirs. Your squires are doubtless worthy
the fame of their masters. Down this passage, Sir Oliver! Edricson! Ha!
one of the old strain of Hampshire Edricsons, I doubt not. And Ford,
they are of a south Saxon stock, and of good repute. There are Norburys
in Cheshire and in Wiltshire, and also, as I have heard, upon the
borders. So, my fair sirs, and I shall see that you are shortly
admitted.�

He had finished his professional commentary by flinging open a folding
door, and ushering the party into a broad hall, which was filled with
a great number of people who were waiting, like themselves, for an
audience. The room was very spacious, lighted on one side by three
arched and mullioned windows, while opposite was a huge fireplace in
which a pile of faggots was blazing merrily. Many of the company had
crowded round the flames, for the weather was bitterly cold; but the
two knights seated themselves upon a bancal, with their squires standing
behind them. Looking down the room, Alleyne marked that both floor and
ceiling were of the richest oak, the latter spanned by twelve arching
beams, which were adorned at either end by the lilies and the lions of
the royal arms. On the further side was a small door, on each side of
which stood men-at-arms. From time to time an elderly man in black with
rounded shoulders and a long white wand in his hand came softly forth
from this inner room, and beckoned to one or other of the company, who
doffed cap and followed him.

The two knights were deep in talk, when Alleyne became aware of a
remarkable individual who was walking round the room in their direction.
As he passed each knot of cavaliers every head turned to look after
him, and it was evident, from the bows and respectful salutations on
all sides, that the interest which he excited was not due merely to his
strange personal appearance. He was tall and straight as a lance, though
of a great age, for his hair, which curled from under his velvet cap of
maintenance, was as white as the new-fallen snow. Yet, from the swing of
his stride and the spring of his step, it was clear that he had not yet
lost the fire and activity of his youth. His fierce hawk-like face was
clean shaven like that of a priest, save for a long thin wisp of white
moustache which drooped down half way to his shoulder. That he had
been handsome might be easily judged from his high aquiline nose and
clear-cut chin; but his features had been so distorted by the seams and
scars of old wounds, and by the loss of one eye which had been torn
from the socket, that there was little left to remind one of the dashing
young knight who had been fifty years ago the fairest as well as the
boldest of the English chivalry. Yet what knight was there in that hall
of St. Andrew's who would not have gladly laid down youth, beauty, and
all that he possessed to win the fame of this man? For who could be
named with Chandos, the stainless knight, the wise councillor, the
valiant warrior, the hero of Crecy, of Winchelsea, of Poictiers, of
Auray, and of as many other battles as there were years to his life?

�Ha, my little heart of gold!� he cried, darting forward suddenly and
throwing his arms round Sir Nigel. �I heard that you were here and have
been seeking you.�

�My fair and dear lord,� said the knight, returning the warrior's
embrace, �I have indeed come back to you, for where else shall I go that
I may learn to be a gentle and a hardy knight?�

�By my troth!� said Chandos with a smile, �it is very fitting that we
should be companions, Nigel, for since you have tied up one of your
eyes, and I have had the mischance to lose one of mine, we have but a
pair between us. Ah, Sir Oliver! you were on the blind side of me and I
saw you not. A wise woman hath made prophecy that this blind side will
one day be the death of me. We shall go in to the prince anon; but in
truth he hath much upon his hands, for what with Pedro, and the King of
Majorca, and the King of Navarre, who is no two days of the same mind,
and the Gascon barons who are all chaffering for terms like so many
hucksters, he hath an uneasy part to play. But how left you the Lady
Loring?�

�She was well, my fair lord, and sent her service and greetings to you.�

�I am ever her knight and slave. And your journey, I trust that it was
pleasant?�

�As heart could wish. We had sight of two rover galleys, and even came
to have some slight bickering with them.�

�Ever in luck's way, Nigel!� quoth Sir John. �We must hear the tale
anon. But I deem it best that ye should leave your squires and come with
me, for, howsoe'er pressed the prince may be, I am very sure that he
would be loth to keep two old comrades-in-arms upon the further side of
the door. Follow close behind me, and I will forestall old Sir William,
though I can scarce promise to roll forth your style and rank as is
his wont.� So saying, he led the way to the inner chamber, the two
companions treading close at his heels, and nodding to right and left as
they caught sight of familiar faces among the crowd.



CHAPTER XIX. HOW THERE WAS STIR AT THE ABBEY OF ST. ANDREW'S.


The prince's reception-room, although of no great size, was fitted up
with all the state and luxury which the fame and power of its owner
demanded. A high dais at the further end was roofed in by a broad canopy
of scarlet velvet spangled with silver fleurs-de-lis, and supported at
either corner by silver rods. This was approached by four steps carpeted
with the same material, while all round were scattered rich cushions,
oriental mats and costly rugs of fur. The choicest tapestries which the
looms of Arras could furnish draped the walls, whereon the battles of
Judas Maccabaeus were set forth, with the Jewish warriors in plate of
proof, with crest and lance and banderole, as the naive artists of the
day were wont to depict them. A few rich settles and bancals, choicely
carved and decorated with glazed leather hangings of the sort termed _or
basane_, completed the furniture of the apartment, save that at one side
of the dais there stood a lofty perch, upon which a cast of three solemn
Prussian gerfalcons sat, hooded and jesseled, as silent and motionless
as the royal fowler who stood beside them.

In the centre of the dais were two very high chairs with dorserets,
which arched forwards over the heads of the occupants, the whole covered
with light-blue silk thickly powdered with golden stars. On that to the
right sat a very tall and well formed man with red hair, a livid face,
and a cold blue eye, which had in it something peculiarly sinister and
menacing. He lounged back in a careless position, and yawned repeatedly
as though heartily weary of the proceedings, stooping from time to time
to fondle a shaggy Spanish greyhound which lay stretched at his feet. On
the other throne there was perched bolt upright, with prim demeanor, as
though he felt himself to be upon his good behavior, a little, round,
pippin faced person, who smiled and bobbed to every one whose eye he
chanced to meet. Between and a little in front of them on a humble
charette or stool, sat a slim, dark young man, whose quiet attire and
modest manner would scarce proclaim him to be the most noted prince in
Europe. A jupon of dark blue cloth, tagged with buckles and pendants of
gold, seemed but a sombre and plain attire amidst the wealth of silk and
ermine and gilt tissue of fustian with which he was surrounded. He sat
with his two hands clasped round his knee, his head slightly bent,
and an expression of impatience and of trouble upon his clear,
well-chiselled features. Behind the thrones there stood two men in
purple gowns, with ascetic, clean-shaven faces, and half a dozen other
high dignitaries and office-holders of Aquitaine. Below on either side
of the steps were forty or fifty barons, knights, and courtiers, ranged
in a triple row to the right and the left, with a clear passage in the
centre.

�There sits the prince,� whispered Sir John Chandos, as they entered.
�He on the right is Pedro, whom we are about to put upon the Spanish
throne. The other is Don James, whom we purpose with the aid of God to
help to his throne in Majorca. Now follow me, and take it not to heart
if he be a little short in his speech, for indeed his mind is full of
many very weighty concerns.�

The prince, however, had already observed their entrance, and, springing
to his feet, he had advanced with a winning smile and the light of
welcome in his eyes.

�We do not need your good offices as herald here, Sir John,� said he in
a low but clear voice; �these valiant knights are very well known to me.
Welcome to Aquitaine, Sir Nigel Loring and Sir Oliver Buttesthorn. Nay,
keep your knee for my sweet father at Windsor. I would have your hands,
my friends. We are like to give you some work to do ere you see the
downs of Hampshire once more. Know you aught of Spain, Sir Oliver?�

�Nought, my sire, save that I have heard men say that there is a dish
named an olla which is prepared there, though I have never been clear in
my mind as to whether it was but a ragout such as is to be found in the
south, or whether there is some seasoning such as fennel or garlic which
is peculiar to Spain.�

�Your doubts, Sir Oliver, shall soon be resolved,� answered the prince,
laughing heartily, as did many of the barons who surrounded them. �His
majesty here will doubtless order that you have this dish hotly seasoned
when we are all safely in Castile.�

�I will have a hotly seasoned dish for some folk I know of,� answered
Don Pedro with a cold smile.

�But my friend Sir Oliver can fight right hardily without either bite or
sup,� remarked the prince. �Did I not see him at Poictiers, when for two
days we had not more than a crust of bread and a cup of foul water, yet
carrying himself most valiantly. With my own eyes I saw him in the rout
sweep the head from a knight of Picardy with one blow of his sword.�

�The rogue got between me and the nearest French victual wain,� muttered
Sir Oliver, amid a fresh titter from those who were near enough to catch
his words.

�How many have you in your train?� asked the prince, assuming a graver
mien.

�I have forty men-at-arms, sire,� said Sir Oliver.

�And I have one hundred archers and a score of lancers, but there are
two hundred men who wait for me on this side of the water upon the
borders of Navarre.�

�And who are they, Sir Nigel?�

�They are a free company, sire, and they are called the White Company.�

To the astonishment of the knight, his words provoked a burst of
merriment from the barons round, in which the two kings and the prince
were fain to join. Sir Nigel blinked mildly from one to the other, until
at last perceiving a stout black-bearded knight at his elbow, whose
laugh rang somewhat louder than the others, he touched him lightly upon
the sleeve.

�Perchance, my fair sir,� he whispered, �there is some small vow of
which I may relieve you. Might we not have some honorable debate upon
the matter. Your gentle courtesy may perhaps grant me an exchange of
thrusts.�

�Nay, nay, Sir Nigel,� cried the prince, �fasten not the offence upon
Sir Robert Briquet, for we are one and all bogged in the same mire.
Truth to say, our ears have just been vexed by the doings of the same
company, and I have even now made vow to hang the man who held the rank
of captain over it. I little thought to find him among the bravest of my
own chosen chieftains. But the vow is now nought, for, as you have
never seen your company, it would be a fool's act to blame you for their
doings.�

�My liege,� said Sir Nigel, �it is a very small matter that I should be
hanged, albeit the manner of death is somewhat more ignoble than I had
hoped for. On the other hand, it would be a very grievous thing that
you, the Prince of England and the flower of knighthood, should make a
vow, whether in ignorance or no, and fail to bring it to fulfilment.�

�Vex not your mind on that,� the prince answered, smiling. �We have had
a citizen from Montauban here this very day, who told us such a tale of
sack and murder and pillage that it moved our blood; but our wrath was
turned upon the man who was in authority over them.�

�My dear and honored master,� cried Nigel, in great anxiety, �I fear me
much that in your gentleness of heart you are straining this vow which
you have taken. If there be so much as a shadow of a doubt as to the
form of it, it were a thousand times best----�

�Peace! peace!� cried the prince impatiently. �I am very well able to
look to my own vows and their performance. We hope to see you both
in the banquet-hall anon. Meanwhile you will attend upon us with our
train.� He bowed, and Chandos, plucking Sir Oliver by the sleeve, led
them both away to the back of the press of courtiers.

�Why, little coz,� he whispered, �you are very eager to have your neck
in a noose. By my soul! had you asked as much from our new ally Don
Pedro, he had not baulked you. Between friends, there is overmuch of
the hangman in him, and too little of the prince. But indeed this
White Company is a rough band, and may take some handling ere you find
yourself safe in your captaincy.�

�I doubt not, with the help of St. Paul, that I shall bring them to some
order,� Sir Nigel answered. �But there are many faces here which are new
to me, though others have been before me since first I waited upon my
dear master, Sir Walter. I pray you to tell me, Sir John, who are these
priests upon the dais?�

�The one is the Archbishop of Bordeaux, Nigel, and the other the Bishop
of Agen.�

�And the dark knight with gray-streaked beard? By my troth, he seems to
be a man of much wisdom and valor.�

�He is Sir William Felton, who, with my unworthy self, is the chief
counsellor of the prince, he being high steward and I the seneschal of
Aquitaine.�

�And the knights upon the right, beside Don Pedro?�

�They are cavaliers of Spain who have followed him in his exile. The one
at his elbow is Fernando de Castro, who is as brave and true a man as
heart could wish. In front to the right are the Gascon lords. You may
well tell them by their clouded brows, for there hath been some ill-will
of late betwixt the prince and them. The tall and burly man is the
Captal de Buch, whom I doubt not that you know, for a braver knight
never laid lance in rest. That heavy-faced cavalier who plucks his
skirts and whispers in his ear is Lord Oliver de Clisson, known also as
the butcher. He it is who stirs up strife, and forever blows the dying
embers into flame. The man with the mole upon his cheek is the Lord
Pommers, and his two brothers stand behind him, with the Lord Lesparre,
Lord de Rosem, Lord de Mucident, Sir Perducas d'Albret, the Souldich de
la Trane, and others. Further back are knights from Quercy, Limousin,
Saintonge, Poitou, and Aquitaine, with the valiant Sir Guiscard d'Angle.
That is he in the rose-colored doublet with the ermine.�

�And the knights upon this side?�

�They are all Englishmen, some of the household and others who like
yourself, are captains of companies. There is Lord Neville, Sir Stephen
Cossington, and Sir Matthew Gourney, with Sir Walter Huet, Sir Thomas
Banaster, and Sir Thomas Felton, who is the brother of the high steward.
Mark well the man with the high nose and flaxen beard who hath placed
his hand upon the shoulder of the dark hard-faced cavalier in the
rust-stained jupon.�

�Aye, by St. Paul!� observed Sir Nigel, �they both bear the print of
their armor upon their cotes-hardies. Methinks they are men who breathe
freer in a camp than a court.�

�There are many of us who do that, Nigel,� said Chandos, �and the head
of the court is, I dare warrant, among them. But of these two men the
one is Sir Hugh Calverley, and the other is Sir Robert Knolles.�

Sir Nigel and Sir Oliver craned their necks to have the clearer view of
these famous warriors, the one a chosen leader of free companies, the
other a man who by his fierce valor and energy had raised himself from
the lowest ranks until he was second only to Chandos himself in the
esteem of the army.

�He hath no light hand in war, hath Sir Robert,� said Chandos. �If he
passes through a country you may tell it for some years to come. I have
heard that in the north it is still the use to call a house which hath
but the two gable ends left, without walls or roof, a Knolles' mitre.�

�I have often heard of him,� said Nigel, �and I have hoped to be so far
honored as to run a course with him. But hark, Sir John, what is amiss
with the prince?�

Whilst Chandos had been conversing with the two knights a continuous
stream of suitors had been ushered in, adventurers seeking to sell their
swords and merchants clamoring over some grievance, a ship detained
for the carriage of troops, or a tun of sweet wine which had the bottom
knocked out by a troop of thirsty archers. A few words from the prince
disposed of each case, and, if the applicant liked not the judgment, a
quick glance from the prince's dark eyes sent him to the door with the
grievance all gone out of him. The younger ruler had sat listlessly upon
his stool with the two puppet monarchs enthroned behind him, but of a
sudden a dark shadow passed over his face, and he sprang to his feet in
one of those gusts of passion which were the single blot upon his noble
and generous character.

�How now, Don Martin de la Carra?� he cried. �How now, sirrah? What
message do you bring to us from our brother of Navarre?�

The new-comer to whom this abrupt query had been addressed was a tall
and exceedingly handsome cavalier who had just been ushered into the
apartment. His swarthy cheek and raven black hair spoke of the fiery
south, and he wore his long black cloak swathed across his chest and
over his shoulders in a graceful sweeping fashion, which was neither
English nor French. With stately steps and many profound bows, he
advanced to the foot of the dais before replying to the prince's
question.

�My powerful and illustrious master,� he began, �Charles, King of
Navarre, Earl of Evreux, Count of Champagne, who also writeth himself
Overlord of Bearn, hereby sends his love and greetings to his dear
cousin Edward, the Prince of Wales, Governor of Aquitaine, Grand
Commander of----�

�Tush! tush! Don Martin!� interrupted the prince, who had been beating
the ground with his foot impatiently during this stately preamble. �We
already know our cousin's titles and style, and, certes, we know our
own. To the point, man, and at once. Are the passes open to us, or does
your master go back from his word pledged to me at Libourne no later
than last Michaelmas?�

�It would ill become my gracious master, sire, to go back from
promise given. He does but ask some delay and certain conditions and
hostages----�

�Conditions! Hostages! Is he speaking to the Prince of England, or is it
to the bourgeois provost of some half-captured town! Conditions, quotha?
He may find much to mend in his own condition ere long. The passes are,
then, closed to us?�

�Nay, sire----�

�They are open, then?�

�Nay, sire, if you would but----�

�Enough, enough, Don Martin,� cried the prince. �It is a sorry sight to
see so true a knight pleading in so false a cause. We know the doings of
our cousin Charles. We know that while with the right hand he takes our
fifty thousand crowns for the holding of the passes open, he hath his
left outstretched to Henry of Trastamare, or to the King of France, all
ready to take as many more for the keeping them closed. I know our good
Charles, and, by my blessed name-saint the Confessor, he shall learn
that I know him. He sets his kingdom up to the best bidder, like some
scullion farrier selling a glandered horse. He is----�

�My lord,� cried Don Martin, �I cannot stand there to hear such words
of my master. Did they come from other lips, I should know better how to
answer them.�

Don Pedro frowned and curled his lip, but the prince smiled and nodded
his approbation.

�Your bearing and your words, Don Martin, are such I should have looked
for in you,� he remarked. �You will tell the king, your master, that he
hath been paid his price and that if he holds to his promise he hath my
word for it that no scath shall come to his people, nor to their houses
or gear. If, however, we have not his leave, I shall come close at the
heels of this message without his leave, and bearing a key with me
which shall open all that he may close.� He stooped and whispered to Sir
Robert Knolles and Sir Huge Calverley, who smiled as men well pleased,
and hastened from the room.

�Our cousin Charles has had experience of our friendship,� the prince
continued, �and now, by the Saints! he shall feel a touch of our
displeasure. I send now a message to our cousin Charles which his whole
kingdom may read. Let him take heed lest worse befall him. Where is my
Lord Chandos? Ha, Sir John, I commend this worthy knight to your care.
You will see that he hath refection, and such a purse of gold as may
defray his charges, for indeed it is great honor to any court to have
within it so noble and gentle a cavalier. How say you, sire?� he
asked, turning to the Spanish refugee, while the herald of Navarre was
conducted from the chamber by the old warrior.

�It is not our custom in Spain to reward pertness in a messenger,� Don
Pedro answered, patting the head of his greyhound. �Yet we have all
heard the lengths to which your royal generosity runs.�

�In sooth, yes,� cried the King of Majorca.

�Who should know it better than we?� said Don Pedro bitterly, �since we
have had to fly to you in our trouble as to the natural protector of all
who are weak.�

�Nay, nay, as brothers to a brother,� cried the prince, with sparkling
eyes. �We doubt not, with the help of God, to see you very soon restored
to those thrones from which you have been so traitorously thrust.�

�When that happy day comes,� said Pedro, �then Spain shall be to you as
Aquitaine, and, be your project what it may, you may ever count on every
troop and every ship over which flies the banner of Castile.�

�And,� added the other, �upon every aid which the wealth and power of
Majorca can bestow.�

�Touching the hundred thousand crowns in which I stand your debtor,�
 continued Pedro carelessly, �it can no doubt----�

�Not a word, sire, not a word!� cried the prince. �It is not now when
you are in grief that I would vex your mind with such base and sordid
matters. I have said once and forever that I am yours with every
bow-string of my army and every florin in my coffers.�

�Ah! here is indeed a mirror of chivalry,� said Don Pedro. �I think,
Sir Fernando, since the prince's bounty is stretched so far, that we
may make further use of his gracious goodness to the extent of fifty
thousand crowns. Good Sir William Felton, here, will doubtless settle
the matter with you.�

The stout old English counsellor looked somewhat blank at this prompt
acceptance of his master's bounty.

�If it please you, sire,� he said, �the public funds are at their
lowest, seeing that I have paid twelve thousand men of the companies,
and the new taxes--the hearth-tax and the wine-tax--not yet come in. If
you could wait until the promised help from England comes----�

�Nay, nay, my sweet cousin,� cried Don Pedro. �Had we known that your
own coffers were so low, or that this sorry sum could have weighed one
way or the other, we had been loth indeed----�

�Enough, sire, enough!� said the prince, flushing with vexation. �If
the public funds be, indeed, so backward, Sir William, there is still,
I trust, my own private credit, which hath never been drawn upon for my
own uses, but is now ready in the cause of a friend in adversity. Go,
raise this money upon our own jewels, if nought else may serve, and see
that it be paid over to Don Fernando.�

�In security I offer----� cried Don Pedro.

�Tush! tush!� said the prince. �I am not a Lombard, sire. Your kingly
pledge is my security, without bond or seal. But I have tidings for you,
my lords and lieges, that our brother of Lancaster is on his way for our
capital with four hundred lances and as many archers to aid us in our
venture. When he hath come, and when our fair consort is recovered in
her health, which I trust by the grace of God may be ere many weeks be
past, we shall then join the army at Dax, and set our banners to the
breeze once more.�

A buzz of joy at the prospect of immediate action rose up from the group
of warriors. The prince smiled at the martial ardor which shone upon
every face around him.

�It will hearten you to know,� he continued, �that I have sure advices
that this Henry is a very valiant leader, and that he has it in his
power to make such a stand against us as promises to give us much honor
and pleasure. Of his own people he hath brought together, as I learn,
some fifty thousand, with twelve thousand of the French free companies,
who are, as you know very valiant and expert men-at-arms. It is certain
also, that the brave and worthy Bertrand de Guesclin hath ridden into
France to the Duke of Anjou, and purposes to take back with him great
levies from Picardy and Brittany. We hold Bertrand in high esteem, for
he has oft before been at great pains to furnish us with an honorable
encounter. What think you of it, my worthy Captal? He took you at
Cocherel, and, by my soul! you will have the chance now to pay that
score.�

The Gascon warrior winced a little at the allusion, nor were his
countrymen around him better pleased, for on the only occasion when they
had encountered the arms of France without English aid they had met with
a heavy defeat.

�There are some who say, sire,� said the burly De Clisson, �that the
score is already overpaid, for that without Gascon help Bertrand had not
been taken at Auray, nor had King John been overborne at Poictiers.�

�By heaven! but this is too much,� cried an English nobleman. �Methinks
that Gascony is too small a cock to crow so lustily.�

�The smaller cock, my Lord Audley, may have the longer spur,� remarked
the Captal de Buch.

�May have its comb clipped if it make over-much noise,� broke in an
Englishman.

�By our Lady of Rocamadour!� cried the Lord of Mucident, �this is more
than I can abide. Sir John Charnell, you shall answer to me for those
words!�

�Freely, my lord, and when you will,� returned the Englishman
carelessly.

�My Lord de Clisson,� cried Lord Audley, �you look somewhat fixedly in
my direction. By God's soul! I should be right glad to go further into
the matter with you.�

�And you, my Lord of Pommers,� said Sir Nigel, pushing his way to the
front, �it is in my mind that we might break a lance in gentle and
honorable debate over the question.�

For a moment a dozen challenges flashed backwards and forwards at this
sudden bursting of the cloud which had lowered so long between the
knights of the two nations. Furious and gesticulating the Gascons, white
and cold and sneering the English, while the prince with a half smile
glanced from one party to the other, like a man who loved to dwell upon
a fiery scene, and yet dreaded least the mischief go so far that he
might find it beyond his control.

�Friends, friends!� he cried at last, �this quarrel must go no further.
The man shall answer to me, be he Gascon or English, who carries it
beyond this room. I have overmuch need for your swords that you should
turn them upon each other. Sir John Charnell, Lord Audley, you do not
doubt the courage of our friends of Gascony?�

�Not I, sire,� Lord Audley answered. �I have seen them fight too often
not to know that they are very hardy and valiant gentlemen.�

�And so say I,� quoth the other Englishman; �but, certes, there is no
fear of our forgetting it while they have a tongue in their heads.�

�Nay, Sir John,� said the prince reprovingly, �all peoples have their
own use and customs. There are some who might call us cold and dull and
silent. But you hear, my lords of Gascony, that these gentlemen had no
thought to throw a slur upon your honor or your valor, so let all anger
fade from your mind. Clisson, Captal, De Pommers, I have your word?�

�We are your subjects, sire,� said the Gascon barons, though with no
very good grace. �Your words are our law.�

�Then shall we bury all cause of unkindness in a flagon of Malvoisie,�
 said the prince, cheerily. �Ho, there! the doors of the banquet-hall!
I have been over long from my sweet spouse but I shall be back with you
anon. Let the sewers serve and the minstrels play, while we drain a
cup to the brave days that are before us in the south!� He turned away,
accompanied by the two monarchs, while the rest of the company, with
many a compressed lip and menacing eye, filed slowly through the
side-door to the great chamber in which the royal tables were set forth.



CHAPTER XX. HOW ALLEYNE WON HIS PLACE IN AN HONORABLE GUILD.


Whilst the prince's council was sitting, Alleyne and Ford had remained
in the outer hall, where they were soon surrounded by a noisy group of
young Englishmen of their own rank, all eager to hear the latest news
from England.

�How is it with the old man at Windsor?� asked one.

�And how with the good Queen Philippa?�

�And how with Dame Alice Perrers?� cried a third.

�The devil take your tongue, Wat!� shouted a tall young man, seizing
the last speaker by the collar and giving him an admonitory shake. �The
prince would take your head off for those words.�

�By God's coif! Wat would miss it but little,� said another. �It is as
empty as a beggar's wallet.�

�As empty as an English squire, coz,� cried the first speaker. �What a
devil has become of the maitre-des-tables and his sewers? They have not
put forth the trestles yet.�

�Mon Dieu! if a man could eat himself into knighthood, Humphrey, you
had been a banneret at the least,� observed another, amid a burst of
laughter.

�And if you could drink yourself in, old leather-head, you had been
first baron of the realm,� cried the aggrieved Humphrey. �But how of
England, my lads of Loring?�

�I take it,� said Ford, �that it is much as it was when you were there
last, save that perchance there is a little less noise there.�

�And why less noise, young Solomon?�

�Ah, that is for your wit to discover.�

�Pardieu! here is a paladin come over, with the Hampshire mud still
sticking to his shoes. He means that the noise is less for our being out
of the country.�

�They are very quick in these parts,� said Ford, turning to Alleyne.

�How are we to take this, sir?� asked the ruffling squire.

�You may take it as it comes,� said Ford carelessly.

�Here is pertness!� cried the other.

�Sir, I honor your truthfulness,� said Ford.

�Stint it, Humphrey,� said the tall squire, with a burst of laughter.
�You will have little credit from this gentleman, I perceive. Tongues
are sharp in Hampshire, sir.�

�And swords?�

�Hum! we may prove that. In two days' time is the vepres du tournoi,
when we may see if your lance is as quick as your wit.�

�All very well, Roger Harcomb,� cried a burly, bull-necked young man,
whose square shoulders and massive limbs told of exceptional personal
strength. �You pass too lightly over the matter. We are not to be so
easily overcrowed. The Lord Loring hath given his proofs; but we know
nothing of his squires, save that one of them hath a railing tongue.
And how of you, young sir?� bringing his heavy hand down on Alleyne's
shoulder.

�And what of me, young sir?�

�Ma foi! this is my lady's page come over. Your cheek will be browner
and your hand harder ere you see your mother again.�

�If my hand is not hard, it is ready.�

�Ready? Ready for what? For the hem of my lady's train?�

�Ready to chastise insolence, sir,� cried Alleyne with flashing eyes.

�Sweet little coz!� answered the burly squire. �Such a dainty color!
Such a mellow voice! Eyes of a bashful maid, and hair like a three
years' babe! Voila!� He passed his thick fingers roughly through the
youth's crisp golden curls.

�You seek to force a quarrel, sir,� said the young man, white with
anger.

�And what then?�

�Why, you do it like a country boor, and not like a gentle squire. Hast
been ill bred and as ill taught. I serve a master who could show you how
such things should be done.�

�And how would he do it, O pink of squires?�

�He would neither be loud nor would he be unmannerly, but rather more
gentle than is his wont. He would say, 'Sir, I should take it as an
honor to do some small deed of arms against you, not for mine own glory
or advancement, but rather for the fame of my lady and for the upholding
of chivalry.' Then he would draw his glove, thus, and throw it on the
ground; or, if he had cause to think that he had to deal with a churl,
he might throw it in his face--as I do now!�

A buzz of excitement went up from the knot of squires as Alleyne, his
gentle nature turned by this causeless attack into fiery resolution,
dashed his glove with all his strength into the sneering face of his
antagonist. From all parts of the hall squires and pages came running,
until a dense, swaying crowd surrounded the disputants.

�Your life for this!� said the bully, with a face which was distorted
with rage.

�If you can take it,� returned Alleyne.

�Good lad!� whispered Ford. �Stick to it close as wax.�

�I shall see justice,� cried Norbury, Sir Oliver's silent attendant.

�You brought it upon yourself, John Tranter,� said the tall squire,
who had been addressed as Roger Harcomb. �You must ever plague the
new-comers. But it were shame if this went further. The lad hath shown a
proper spirit.�

�But a blow! a blow!� cried several of the older squires. �There must be
a finish to this.�

�Nay; Tranter first laid hand upon his head,� said Harcomb. �How say
you, Tranter? The matter may rest where it stands?�

�My name is known in these parts,� said Tranter, proudly, �I can let
pass what might leave a stain upon another. Let him pick up his glove
and say that he has done amiss.�

�I would see him in the claws of the devil first,� whispered Ford.

�You hear, young sir?� said the peacemaker. �Our friend will overlook
the matter if you do but say that you have acted in heat and haste.�

�I cannot say that,� answered Alleyne.

�It is our custom, young sir, when new squires come amongst us from
England, to test them in some such way. Bethink you that if a man have
a destrier or a new lance he will ever try it in time of peace, lest in
days of need it may fail him. How much more then is it proper to test
those who are our comrades in arms.�

�I would draw out if it may honorably be done,� murmured Norbury
in Alleyne's ear. �The man is a noted swordsman and far above your
strength.�

Edricson came, however, of that sturdy Saxon blood which is very slowly
heated, but once up not easily to be cooled. The hint of danger which
Norbury threw out was the one thing needed to harden his resolution.

�I came here at the back of my master,� he said, �and I looked on every
man here as an Englishman and a friend. This gentleman hath shown me a
rough welcome, and if I have answered him in the same spirit he has but
himself to thank. I will pick the glove up; but, certes, I shall abide
what I have done unless he first crave my pardon for what he hath said
and done.�

Tranter shrugged his shoulders. �You have done what you could to save
him, Harcomb,� said he. �We had best settle at once.�

�So say I,� cried Alleyne.

�The council will not break up until the banquet,� remarked a
gray-haired squire. �You have a clear two hours.�

�And the place?�

�The tilting-yard is empty at this hour.�

�Nay; it must not be within the grounds of the court, or it may go hard
with all concerned if it come to the ears of the prince.�

�But there is a quiet spot near the river,� said one youth. �We have
but to pass through the abbey grounds, along the armory wall, past the
church of St. Remi, and so down the Rue des Apotres.�

�En avant, then!� cried Tranter shortly, and the whole assembly flocked
out into the open air, save only those whom the special orders of their
masters held to their posts. These unfortunates crowded to the small
casements, and craned their necks after the throng as far as they could
catch a glimpse of them.

Close to the banks of the Garonne there lay a little tract of green
sward, with the high wall of a prior's garden upon one side and an
orchard with a thick bristle of leafless apple-trees upon the other. The
river ran deep and swift up to the steep bank; but there were few boats
upon it, and the ships were moored far out in the centre of the stream.
Here the two combatants drew their swords and threw off their doublets,
for neither had any defensive armor. The duello with its stately
etiquette had not yet come into vogue, but rough and sudden encounters
were as common as they must ever be when hot-headed youth goes abroad
with a weapon strapped to its waist. In such combats, as well as in
the more formal sports of the tilting-yard, Tranter had won a name for
strength and dexterity which had caused Norbury to utter his well-meant
warning. On the other hand, Alleyne had used his weapons in constant
exercise and practice on every day for many months, and being by nature
quick of eye and prompt of hand, he might pass now as no mean swordsman.
A strangely opposed pair they appeared as they approached each other:
Tranter dark and stout and stiff, with hairy chest and corded arms,
Alleyne a model of comeliness and grace, with his golden hair and his
skin as fair as a woman's. An unequal fight it seemed to most; but there
were a few, and they the most experienced, who saw something in the
youth's steady gray eye and wary step which left the issue open to
doubt.

�Hold, sirs, hold!� cried Norbury, ere a blow had been struck. �This
gentleman hath a two-handed sword, a good foot longer than that of our
friend.�

�Take mine, Alleyne,� said Ford.

�Nay, friends,� he answered, �I understand the weight and balance of
mine own. To work, sir, for our lord may need us at the abbey!�

Tranter's great sword was indeed a mighty vantage in his favor. He stood
with his feet close together, his knees bent outwards, ready for a dash
inwards or a spring out. The weapon he held straight up in front of him
with blade erect, so that he might either bring it down with a swinging
blow, or by a turn of the heavy blade he might guard his own head and
body. A further protection lay in the broad and powerful guard which
crossed the hilt, and which was furnished with a deep and narrow notch,
in which an expert swordsman might catch his foeman's blade, and by
a quick turn of his wrist might snap it across. Alleyne, on the other
hand, must trust for his defence to his quick eye and active foot--for
his sword, though keen as a whetstone could make it, was of a light and
graceful build with a narrow, sloping pommel and a tapering steel.

Tranter well knew his advantage and lost no time in putting it to use.
As his opponent walked towards him he suddenly bounded forward and sent
in a whistling cut which would have severed the other in twain had he
not sprung lightly back from it. So close was it that the point ripped
a gash in the jutting edge of his linen cyclas. Quick as a panther,
Alleyne sprang in with a thrust, but Tranter, who was as active as he
was strong, had already recovered himself and turned it aside with a
movement of his heavy blade. Again he whizzed in a blow which made the
spectators hold their breath, and again Alleyne very quickly and swiftly
slipped from under it, and sent back two lightning thrusts which the
other could scarce parry. So close were they to each other that Alleyne
had no time to spring back from the next cut, which beat down his sword
and grazed his forehead, sending the blood streaming into his eyes and
down his cheeks. He sprang out beyond sword sweep, and the pair stood
breathing heavily, while the crowd of young squires buzzed their
applause.

�Bravely struck on both sides!� cried Roger Harcomb. �You have both
won honor from this meeting, and it would be sin and shame to let it go
further.�

�You have done enough, Edricson,� said Norbury.

�You have carried yourself well,� cried several of the older squires.

�For my part, I have no wish to slay this young man,� said Tranter,
wiping his heated brow.

�Does this gentleman crave my pardon for having used me despitefully?�
 asked Alleyne.

�Nay, not I.�

�Then stand on your guard, sir!� With a clatter and dash the two blades
met once more, Alleyne pressing in so as to keep within the full sweep
of the heavy blade, while Tranter as continually sprang back to have
space for one of his fatal cuts. A three-parts-parried blow drew blood
from Alleyne's left shoulder, but at the same moment he wounded Tranter
slightly upon the thigh. Next instant, however, his blade had slipped
into the fatal notch, there was a sharp cracking sound with a tinkling
upon the ground, and he found a splintered piece of steel fifteen inches
long was all that remained to him of his weapon.

�Your life is in my hands!� cried Tranter, with a bitter smile.

�Nay, nay, he makes submission!� broke in several squires.

�Another sword!� cried Ford.

�Nay, sir,� said Harcomb, �that is not the custom.�

�Throw down your hilt, Edricson,� cried Norbury.

�Never!� said Alleyne. �Do you crave my pardon, sir?�

�You are mad to ask it.�

�Then on guard again!� cried the young squire, and sprang in with a fire
and a fury which more than made up for the shortness of his weapon. It
had not escaped him that his opponent was breathing in short, hoarse
gasps, like a man who is dizzy with fatigue. Now was the time for the
purer living and the more agile limb to show their value. Back and back
gave Tranter, ever seeking time for a last cut. On and on came Alleyne,
his jagged point now at his foeman's face, now at his throat, now at
his chest, still stabbing and thrusting to pass the line of steel which
covered him. Yet his experienced foeman knew well that such efforts
could not be long sustained. Let him relax for one instant, and his
death-blow had come. Relax he must! Flesh and blood could not stand
the strain. Already the thrusts were less fierce, the foot less ready,
although there was no abatement of the spirit in the steady gray eyes.
Tranter, cunning and wary from years of fighting, knew that his chance
had come. He brushed aside the frail weapon which was opposed to him,
whirled up his great blade, sprang back to get the fairer sweep--and
vanished into the waters of the Garonne.

So intent had the squires, both combatants and spectators, been on
the matter in hand, that all thought of the steep bank and swift still
stream had gone from their minds. It was not until Tranter, giving back
before the other's fiery rush, was upon the very brink, that a general
cry warned him of his danger. That last spring, which he hoped would
have brought the fight to a bloody end, carried him clear of the edge,
and he found himself in an instant eight feet deep in the ice-cold
stream. Once and twice his gasping face and clutching fingers broke up
through the still green water, sweeping outwards in the swirl of the
current. In vain were sword-sheaths, apple-branches and belts linked
together thrown out to him by his companions. Alleyne had dropped his
shattered sword and was standing, trembling in every limb, with his rage
all changed in an instant to pity. For the third time the drowning man
came to the surface, his hands full of green slimy water-plants, his
eyes turned in despair to the shore. Their glance fell upon Alleyne,
and he could not withstand the mute appeal which he read in them. In an
instant he, too, was in the Garonne, striking out with powerful strokes
for his late foeman.

Yet the current was swift and strong, and, good swimmer as he was, it
was no easy task which Alleyne had set himself. To clutch at Tranter and
to seize him by the hair was the work of a few seconds, but to hold his
head above water and to make their way out of the current was another
matter. For a hundred strokes he did not seem to gain an inch. Then at
last, amid a shout of joy and praise from the bank, they slowly drew
clear into more stagnant water, at the instant that a rope, made of a
dozen sword-belts linked together by the buckles, was thrown by
Ford into their very hands. Three pulls from eager arms, and the two
combatants, dripping and pale, were dragged up the bank, and lay panting
upon the grass.

John Tranter was the first to come to himself, for although he had been
longer in the water, he had done nothing during that fierce battle with
the current. He staggered to his feet and looked down upon his rescuer,
who had raised himself upon his elbow, and was smiling faintly at the
buzz of congratulation and of praise which broke from the squires around
him.

�I am much beholden to you, sir,� said Tranter, though in no very
friendly voice. �Certes, I should have been in the river now but for
you, for I was born in Warwickshire, which is but a dry county, and
there are few who swim in those parts.�

�I ask no thanks,� Alleyne answered shortly. �Give me your hand to rise,
Ford.�

�The river has been my enemy,� said Tranter, �but it hath been a good
friend to you, for it has saved your life this day.�

�That is as it may be,� returned Alleyne.

�But all is now well over,� quoth Harcomb, �and no scath come of it,
which is more than I had at one time hoped for. Our young friend here
hath very fairly and honestly earned his right to be craftsman of
the Honorable Guild of the Squires of Bordeaux. Here is your doublet,
Tranter.�

�Alas for my poor sword which lies at the bottom of the Garonne!� said
the squire.

�Here is your pourpoint, Edricson,� cried Norbury. �Throw it over your
shoulders, that you may have at least one dry garment.�

�And now away back to the abbey!� said several.

�One moment, sirs,� cried Alleyne, who was leaning on Ford's shoulder,
with the broken sword, which he had picked up, still clutched in his
right hand. �My ears may be somewhat dulled by the water, and perchance
what has been said has escaped me, but I have not yet heard this
gentleman crave pardon for the insults which he put upon me in the
hall.�

�What! do you still pursue the quarrel?� asked Tranter.

�And why not, sir? I am slow to take up such things, but once afoot I
shall follow it while I have life or breath.�

�Ma foi! you have not too much of either, for you are as white as
marble,� said Harcomb bluntly. �Take my rede, sir, and let it drop, for
you have come very well out from it.�

�Nay,� said Alleyne, �this quarrel is none of my making; but, now that I
am here, I swear to you that I shall never leave this spot until I have
that which I have come for: so ask my pardon, sir, or choose another
glaive and to it again.�

The young squire was deadly white from his exertions, both on the land
and in the water. Soaking and stained, with a smear of blood on his
white shoulder and another on his brow, there was still in his whole
pose and set of face the trace of an inflexible resolution. His
opponent's duller and more material mind quailed before the fire and
intensity of a higher spiritual nature.

�I had not thought that you had taken it so amiss,� said he awkwardly.
�It was but such a jest as we play upon each other, and, if you must
have it so, I am sorry for it.�

�Then I am sorry too,� quoth Alleyne warmly, �and here is my hand upon
it.�

�And the none-meat horn has blown three times,� quoth Harcomb, as they
all streamed in chattering groups from the ground. �I know not what the
prince's maitre-de-cuisine will say or think. By my troth! master Ford,
your friend here is in need of a cup of wine, for he hath drunk deeply
of Garonne water. I had not thought from his fair face that he had stood
to this matter so shrewdly.�

�Faith,� said Ford, �this air of Bordeaux hath turned our turtle-dove
into a game-cock. A milder or more courteous youth never came out of
Hampshire.�

�His master also, as I understand, is a very mild and courteous
gentleman,� remarked Harcomb; �yet I do not think that they are either
of them men with whom it is very safe to trifle.�



CHAPTER XXI. HOW AGOSTINO PISANO RISKED HIS HEAD.


Even the squires' table at the Abbey of St. Andrew's at Bordeaux was
on a very sumptuous scale while the prince held his court there. Here
first, after the meagre fare of Beaulieu and the stinted board of the
Lady Loring, Alleyne learned the lengths to which luxury and refinement
might be pushed. Roasted peacocks, with the feathers all carefully
replaced, so that the bird lay upon the dish even as it had strutted in
life, boars' heads with the tusks gilded and the mouth lined with silver
foil, jellies in the shape of the Twelve Apostles, and a great pasty
which formed an exact model of the king's new castle at Windsor--these
were a few of the strange dishes which faced him. An archer had brought
him a change of clothes from the cog, and he had already, with the
elasticity of youth, shaken off the troubles and fatigues of the
morning. A page from the inner banqueting-hall had come with word that
their master intended to drink wine at the lodgings of the Lord Chandos
that night, and that he desired his squires to sleep at the hotel of the
�Half Moon� on the Rue des Apotres. Thither then they both set out in
the twilight after the long course of juggling tricks and glee-singing
with which the principal meal was concluded.

A thin rain was falling as the two youths, with their cloaks over their
heads, made their way on foot through the streets of the old town,
leaving their horses in the royal stables. An occasional oil lamp at the
corner of a street, or in the portico of some wealthy burgher, threw a
faint glimmer over the shining cobblestones, and the varied motley crowd
who, in spite of the weather, ebbed and flowed along every highway. In
those scattered circles of dim radiance might be seen the whole
busy panorama of life in a wealthy and martial city. Here passed the
round-faced burgher, swollen with prosperity, his sweeping dark-clothed
gaberdine, flat velvet cap, broad leather belt and dangling pouch all
speaking of comfort and of wealth. Behind him his serving wench, her
blue whimple over her head, and one hand thrust forth to bear the
lanthorn which threw a golden bar of light along her master's path.
Behind them a group of swaggering, half-drunken Yorkshire dalesmen,
speaking a dialect which their own southland countrymen could scarce
comprehend, their jerkins marked with the pelican, which showed that
they had come over in the train of the north-country Stapletons. The
burgher glanced back at their fierce faces and quickened his step, while
the girl pulled her whimple closer round her, for there was a meaning in
their wild eyes, as they stared at the purse and the maiden, which
men of all tongues could understand. Then came archers of the guard,
shrill-voiced women of the camp, English pages with their fair skins and
blue wondering eyes, dark-robed friars, lounging men-at-arms, swarthy
loud-tongued Gascon serving-men, seamen from the river, rude peasants
of the Medoc, and becloaked and befeathered squires of the court, all
jostling and pushing in an ever-changing, many-colored stream, while
English, French, Welsh, Basque, and the varied dialects of Gascony and
Guienne filled the air with their babel. From time to time the throng
would be burst asunder and a lady's horse-litter would trot past towards
the abbey, or there would come a knot of torch-bearing archers walking
in front of Gascon baron or English knight, as he sought his lodgings after
the palace revels. Clatter of hoofs, clinking of weapons, shouts from the
drunken brawlers, and high laughter of women, they all rose up, like
the mist from a marsh, out of the crowded streets of the dim-lit city.

One couple out of the moving throng especially engaged the attention
of the two young squires, the more so as they were going in their own
direction and immediately in front of them. They consisted of a man and
a girl, the former very tall with rounded shoulders, a limp of one
foot, and a large flat object covered with dark cloth under his arm.
His companion was young and straight, with a quick, elastic step and
graceful bearing, though so swathed in a black mantle that little could
be seen of her face save a flash of dark eyes and a curve of raven hair.
The tall man leaned heavily upon her to take the weight off his tender
foot, while he held his burden betwixt himself and the wall, cuddling it
jealously to his side, and thrusting forward his young companion to act
as a buttress whenever the pressure of the crowd threatened to bear him
away. The evident anxiety of the man, the appearance of his attendant,
and the joint care with which they defended their concealed possession,
excited the interest of the two young Englishmen who walked within
hand-touch of them.

�Courage, child!� they heard the tall man exclaim in strange hybrid
French. �If we can win another sixty paces we are safe.�

�Hold it safe, father,� the other answered, in the same soft, mincing
dialect. �We have no cause for fear.�

�Verily, they are heathens and barbarians,� cried the man; �mad,
howling, drunken barbarians! Forty more paces, Tita mia, and I swear to
the holy Eloi, patron of all learned craftsmen, that I will never set
foot over my door again until the whole swarm are safely hived in their
camp of Dax, or wherever else they curse with their presence. Twenty
more paces, my treasure! Ah, my God! how they push and brawl! Get
in their way, Tita mia! Put your little elbow bravely out! Set your
shoulders squarely against them, girl! Why should you give way to these
mad islanders? Ah, cospetto! we are ruined and destroyed!�

The crowd had thickened in front, so that the lame man and the girl had
come to a stand. Several half-drunken English archers, attracted, as
the squires had been, by their singular appearance, were facing towards
them, and peering at them through the dim light.

�By the three kings!� cried one, �here is an old dotard shrew to have
so goodly a crutch! Use the leg that God hath given you, man, and do not
bear so heavily upon the wench.�

�Twenty devils fly away with him!� shouted another. �What, how, man!
are brave archers to go maidless while an old man uses one as a
walking-staff?�

�Come with me, my honey-bird!� cried a third, plucking at the girl's
mantle.

�Nay, with me, my heart's desire!� said the first. �By St. George! our
life is short, and we should be merry while we may. May I never see
Chester Bridge again, if she is not a right winsome lass!�

�What hath the old toad under his arm?� cried one of the others. �He
hugs it to him as the devil hugged the pardoner.�

�Let us see, old bag of bones; let us see what it is that you have
under your arm!� They crowded in upon him, while he, ignorant of their
language, could but clutch the girl with one hand and the parcel with
the other, looking wildly about in search of help.

�Nay, lads, nay!� cried Ford, pushing back the nearest archer. �This
is but scurvy conduct. Keep your hands off, or it will be the worse for
you.�

�Keep your tongue still, or it will be the worse for you,� shouted the
most drunken of the archers. �Who are you to spoil sport?�

�A raw squire, new landed,� said another. �By St. Thomas of Kent! we are
at the beck of our master, but we are not to be ordered by every babe
whose mother hath sent him as far as Aquitaine.�

�Oh, gentlemen,� cried the girl in broken French, �for dear Christ's
sake stand by us, and do not let these terrible men do us an injury.�

�Have no fears, lady,� Alleyne answered. �We shall see that all is
well with you. Take your hand from the girl's wrist, you north-country
rogue!�

�Hold to her, Wat!� said a great black-bearded man-at-arms, whose steel
breast-plate glimmered in the dusk. �Keep your hands from your bodkins,
you two, for that was my trade before you were born, and, by God's soul!
I will drive a handful of steel through you if you move a finger.�

�Thank God!� said Alleyne suddenly, as he spied in the lamp-light a
shock of blazing red hair which fringed a steel cap high above the heads
of the crowd. �Here is John, and Aylward, too! Help us, comrades, for
there is wrong being done to this maid and to the old man.�

�Hola, mon petit,� said the old bowman, pushing his way through the
crowd, with the huge forester at his heels. �What is all this, then?
By the twang of string! I think that you will have some work upon your
hands if you are to right all the wrongs that you may see upon this side
of the water. It is not to be thought that a troop of bowmen, with the
wine buzzing in their ears, will be as soft-spoken as so many young
clerks in an orchard. When you have been a year with the Company
you will think less of such matters. But what is amiss here? The
provost-marshal with his archers is coming this way, and some of you may
find yourselves in the stretch-neck, if you take not heed.�

�Why, it is old Sam Aylward of the White Company!� shouted the
man-at-arms. �Why, Samkin, what hath come upon thee? I can call to mind
the day when you were as roaring a blade as ever called himself a free
companion. By my soul! from Limoges to Navarre, who was there who would
kiss a wench or cut a throat as readily as bowman Aylward of Hawkwood's
company?�

�Like enough, Peter,� said Aylward, �and, by my hilt! I may not have
changed so much. But it was ever a fair loose and a clear mark with me.
The wench must be willing, or the man must be standing up against me,
else, by these ten finger bones! either were safe enough for me.�

A glance at Aylward's resolute face, and at the huge shoulders of Hordle
John, had convinced the archers that there was little to be got by
violence. The girl and the old man began to shuffle on in the crowd
without their tormentors venturing to stop them. Ford and Alleyne
followed slowly behind them, but Aylward caught the latter by the
shoulder.

�By my hilt! camarade,� said he, �I hear that you have done great things
at the Abbey to-day, but I pray you to have a care, for it was I who
brought you into the Company, and it would be a black day for me if
aught were to befall you.�

�Nay, Aylward, I will have a care.�

�Thrust not forward into danger too much, mon petit. In a little time
your wrist will be stronger and your cut more shrewd. There will be some
of us at the 'Rose de Guienne' to-night, which is two doors from the
hotel of the 'Half Moon,' so if you would drain a cup with a few simple
archers you will be right welcome.�

Alleyne promised to be there if his duties would allow, and then,
slipping through the crowd, he rejoined Ford, who was standing in talk
with the two strangers, who had now reached their own doorstep.

�Brave young signor,� cried the tall man, throwing his arms round
Alleyne, �how can we thank you enough for taking our parts against those
horrible drunken barbarians. What should we have done without you? My
Tita would have been dragged away, and my head would have been shivered
into a thousand fragments.�

�Nay, I scarce think that they would have mishandled you so,� said
Alleyne in surprise.

�Ho, ho!� cried he with a high crowing laugh, �it is not the head upon
my shoulders that I think of. Cospetto! no. It is the head under my arm
which you have preserved.�

�Perhaps the signori would deign to come under our roof, father,� said
the maiden. �If we bide here, who knows that some fresh tumult may not
break out.�

�Well said, Tita! Well said, my girl! I pray you, sirs, to honor my
unworthy roof so far. A light, Giacomo! There are five steps up. Now
two more. So! Here we are at last in safety. Corpo di Bacco! I would
not have given ten maravedi for my head when those children of the devil
were pushing us against the wall. Tita mia, you have been a brave girl,
and it was better that you should be pulled and pushed than that my head
should be broken.�

�Yes indeed, father,� said she earnestly.

�But those English! Ach! Take a Goth, a Hun, and a Vandal, mix them
together and add a Barbary rover; then take this creature and make him
drunk--and you have an Englishman. My God! were ever such people upon
earth! What place is free from them? I hear that they swarm in Italy
even as they swarm here. Everywhere you will find them, except in
heaven.�

�Dear father,� cried Tita, still supporting the angry old man, as he
limped up the curved oaken stair. �You must not forget that these good
signori who have preserved us are also English.�

�Ah, yes. My pardon, sirs! Come into my rooms here. There are some who
might find some pleasure in these paintings, but I learn the art of war
is the only art which is held in honor in your island.�

The low-roofed, oak-panelled room into which he conducted them was
brilliantly lit by four scented oil lamps. Against the walls, upon the
table, on the floor, and in every part of the chamber were great sheets
of glass painted in the most brilliant colors. Ford and Edricson gazed
around them in amazement, for never had they seen such magnificent works
of art.

�You like them then,� the lame artist cried, in answer to the look of
pleasure and of surprise in their faces. �There are then some of you who
have a taste for such trifling.�

�I could not have believed it,� exclaimed Alleyne. �What color! What
outlines! See to this martyrdom of the holy Stephen, Ford. Could you not
yourself pick up one of these stones which lie to the hand of the wicked
murtherers?�

�And see this stag, Alleyne, with the cross betwixt its horns. By my
faith! I have never seen a better one at the Forest of Bere.�

�And the green of this grass--how bright and clear! Why all the painting
that I have seen is but child's play beside this. This worthy gentleman
must be one of those great painters of whom I have oft heard brother
Bartholomew speak in the old days at Beaulieu.�

The dark mobile face of the artist shone with pleasure at the unaffected
delight of the two young Englishmen. His daughter had thrown off her
mantle and disclosed a face of the finest and most delicate Italian
beauty, which soon drew Ford's eyes from the pictures in front of him.
Alleyne, however, continued with little cries of admiration and of
wonderment to turn from the walls to the table and yet again to the
walls.

�What think you of this, young sir?� asked the painter, tearing off the
cloth which concealed the flat object which he had borne beneath his
arm. It was a leaf-shaped sheet of glass bearing upon it a face with a
halo round it, so delicately outlined, and of so perfect a tint, that it
might have been indeed a human face which gazed with sad and thoughtful
eyes upon the young squire. He clapped his hands, with that thrill of
joy which true art will ever give to a true artist.

�It is great!� he cried. �It is wonderful! But I marvel, sir, that you
should have risked a work of such beauty and value by bearing it at
night through so unruly a crowd.�

�I have indeed been rash,� said the artist. �Some wine, Tita, from the
Florence flask! Had it not been for you, I tremble to think of what
might have come of it. See to the skin tint: it is not to be replaced,
for paint as you will, it is not once in a hundred times that it is not
either burned too brown in the furnace or else the color will not hold,
and you get but a sickly white. There you can see the very veins and the
throb of the blood. Yes, diavolo! if it had broken, my heart would have
broken too. It is for the choir window in the church of St. Remi, and
we had gone, my little helper and I, to see if it was indeed of the size
for the stonework. Night had fallen ere we finished, and what could we
do save carry it home as best we might? But you, young sir, you speak as
if you too knew something of the art.�

�So little that I scarce dare speak of it in your presence,� Alleyne
answered. �I have been cloister-bred, and it was no very great matter to
handle the brush better than my brother novices.�

�There are pigments, brush, and paper,� said the old artist. �I do not
give you glass, for that is another matter, and takes much skill in the
mixing of colors. Now I pray you to show me a touch of your art. I thank
you, Tita! The Venetian glasses, cara mia, and fill them to the brim. A
seat, signor!�

While Ford, in his English-French, was conversing with Tita in her
Italian-French, the old man was carefully examining his precious head to
see that no scratch had been left upon its surface. When he glanced up
again, Alleyne had, with a few bold strokes of the brush, tinted in a
woman's face and neck upon the white sheet in front of him.

�Diavolo!� exclaimed the old artist, standing with his head on one side,
�you have power; yes, cospetto! you have power, it is the face of an
angel!�

�It is the face of the Lady Maude Loring!� cried Ford, even more
astonished.

�Why, on my faith, it is not unlike her!� said Alleyne, in some
confusion.

�Ah! a portrait! So much the better. Young man, I am Agostino Pisano,
the son of Andrea Pisano, and I say again that you have power. Further,
I say, that, if you will stay with me, I will teach you all the secrets
of the glass-stainers' mystery: the pigments and their thickening,
which will fuse into the glass and which will not, the furnace and the
glazing--every trick and method you shall know.�

�I would be right glad to study under such a master,� said Alleyne; �but
I am sworn to follow my lord whilst this war lasts.�

�War! war!� cried the old Italian. �Ever this talk of war. And the men
that you hold to be great--what are they? Have I not heard their names?
Soldiers, butchers, destroyers! Ah, per Bacco! we have men in Italy who
are in very truth great. You pull down, you despoil; but they build up,
they restore. Ah, if you could but see my own dear Pisa, the Duomo, the
cloisters of Campo Santo, the high Campanile, with the mellow throb of
her bells upon the warm Italian air! Those are the works of great men.
And I have seen them with my own eyes, these very eyes which look upon
you. I have seen Andrea Orcagna, Taddeo Gaddi, Giottino, Stefano, Simone
Memmi--men whose very colors I am not worthy to mix. And I have seen the
aged Giotto, and he in turn was pupil to Cimabue, before whom there was
no art in Italy, for the Greeks were brought to paint the chapel of the
Gondi at Florence. Ah, signori, there are the real great men whose names
will be held in honor when your soldiers are shown to have been the
enemies of humankind.�

�Faith, sir,� said Ford, �there is something to say for the soldiers
also, for, unless they be defended, how are all these gentlemen whom you
have mentioned to preserve the pictures which they have painted?�

�And all these!� said Alleyne. �Have you indeed done them all?--and
where are they to go?�

�Yes, signor, they are all from my hand. Some are, as you see, upon one
sheet, and some are in many pieces which may fasten together. There are
some who do but paint upon the glass, and then, by placing another sheet
of glass upon the top and fastening it, they keep the air from their
painting. Yet I hold that the true art of my craft lies as much in the
furnace as in the brush. See this rose window, which is from the model
of the Church of the Holy Trinity at Vendome, and this other of the
'Finding of the Grail,' which is for the apse of the Abbey church. Time
was when none but my countrymen could do these things; but there is
Clement of Chartres and others in France who are very worthy workmen.
But, ah! there is that ever shrieking brazen tongue which will not let
us forget for one short hour that it is the arm of the savage, and not
the hand of the master, which rules over the world.�

A stern, clear bugle call had sounded close at hand to summon some
following together for the night.

�It is a sign to us as well,� said Ford. �I would fain stay here forever
amid all these beautiful things--� staring hard at the blushing Tita as
he spoke--�but we must be back at our lord's hostel ere he reach it.�
 Amid renewed thanks and with promises to come again, the two squires
bade their leave of the old Italian glass-stainer and his daughter. The
streets were clearer now, and the rain had stopped, so they made their
way quickly from the Rue du Roi, in which their new friends dwelt, to
the Rue des Apotres, where the hostel of the �Half Moon� was situated.



CHAPTER XXII. HOW THE BOWMEN HELD WASSAIL AT THE �ROSE DE GUIENNE.�


�Mon Dieu! Alleyne, saw you ever so lovely a face?� cried Ford as they
hurried along together. �So pure, so peaceful, and so beautiful!�

�In sooth, yes. And the hue of the skin the most perfect that ever I
saw. Marked you also how the hair curled round the brow? It was wonder
fine.�

�Those eyes, too!� cried Ford. �How clear and how tender--simple, and
yet so full of thought!�

�If there was a weakness it was in the chin,� said Alleyne.

�Nay. I saw none.�

�It was well curved, it is true.�

�Most daintily so.�

�And yet----�

�What then, Alleyne? Wouldst find flaw in the sun?�

�Well, bethink you, Ford, would not more power and expression have been
put into the face by a long and noble beard?�

�Holy Virgin!� cried Ford, �the man is mad. A beard on the face of
little Tita!�

�Tita! Who spoke of Tita?�

�Who spoke of aught else?�

�It was the picture of St. Remi, man, of which I have been discoursing.�

�You are indeed,� cried Ford, laughing, �a Goth, Hun, and Vandal, with
all the other hard names which the old man called us. How could you
think so much of a smear of pigments, when there was such a picture
painted by the good God himself in the very room with you? But who is
this?�

�If it please you, sirs,� said an archer, running across to them,
�Aylward and others would be right glad to see you. They are within
here. He bade me say to you that the Lord Loring will not need your
service to-night, as he sleeps with the Lord Chandos.�

�By my faith!� said Ford, �we do not need a guide to lead us to their
presence.� As he spoke there came a roar of singing from the tavern upon
the right, with shouts of laughter and stamping of feet. Passing under
a low door, and down a stone-flagged passage, they found themselves in a
long narrow hall lit up by a pair of blazing torches, one at either end.
Trusses of straw had been thrown down along the walls, and reclining on
them were some twenty or thirty archers, all of the Company, their
steel caps and jacks thrown off, their tunics open and their great limbs
sprawling upon the clay floor. At every man's elbow stood his leathern
blackjack of beer, while at the further end a hogshead with its end
knocked in promised an abundant supply for the future. Behind the
hogshead, on a half circle of kegs, boxes, and rude settles, sat
Aylward, John, Black Simon and three or four other leading men of the
archers, together with Goodwin Hawtayne, the master-shipman, who had
left his yellow cog in the river to have a last rouse with his friends
of the Company. Ford and Alleyne took their seats between Aylward and
Black Simon, without their entrance checking in any degree the hubbub
which was going on.

�Ale, mes camarades?� cried the bowman, �or shall it be wine? Nay,
but ye must have the one or the other. Here, Jacques, thou limb of the
devil, bring a bottrine of the oldest vernage, and see that you do not
shake it. Hast heard the news?�

�Nay,� cried both the squires.

�That we are to have a brave tourney.�

�A tourney?�

�Aye, lads. For the Captal du Buch hath sworn that he will find
five knights from this side of the water who will ride over any five
Englishmen who ever threw leg over saddle; and Chandos hath taken up the
challenge, and the prince hath promised a golden vase for the man who
carries himself best, and all the court is in a buzz over it.�

�Why should the knights have all the sport?� growled Hordle John. �Could
they not set up five archers for the honor of Aquitaine and of Gascony?�

�Or five men-at-arms,� said Black Simon.

�But who are the English knights?� asked Hawtayne.

�There are three hundred and forty-one in the town,� said Aylward, �and
I hear that three hundred and forty cartels and defiances have already
been sent in, the only one missing being Sir John Ravensholme, who is in
his bed with the sweating sickness, and cannot set foot to ground.�

�I have heard of it from one of the archers of the guard,� cried a
bowman from among the straw; �I hear that the prince wished to break a
lance, but that Chandos would not hear of it, for the game is likely to
be a rough one.�

�Then there is Chandos.�

�Nay, the prince would not permit it. He is to be marshal of the lists,
with Sir William Felton and the Duc d'Armagnac. The English will be the
Lord Audley, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Thomas Wake, Sir William Beauchamp,
and our own very good lord and leader.�

�Hurrah for him, and God be with him!� cried several. �It is honor to
draw string in his service.�

�So you may well say,� said Aylward. �By my ten finger-bones! if you
march behind the pennon of the five roses you are like to see all that a
good bowman would wish to see. Ha! yes, mes garcons, you laugh, but, by
my hilt! you may not laugh when you find yourselves where he will take
you, for you can never tell what strange vow he may not have sworn to. I
see that he has a patch over his eye, even as he had at Poictiers. There
will come bloodshed of that patch, or I am the more mistaken.�

�How chanced it at Poictiers, good Master Aylward?� asked one of the
young archers, leaning upon his elbows, with his eyes fixed respectfully
upon the old bowman's rugged face.

�Aye, Aylward, tell us of it,� cried Hordle John.

�Here is to old Samkin Aylward!� shouted several at the further end of
the room, waving their blackjacks in the air.

�Ask him!� said Aylward modestly, nodding towards Black Simon. �He saw
more than I did. And yet, by the holy nails! there was not very much
that I did not see either.�

�Ah, yes,� said Simon, shaking his head, �it was a great day. I never
hope to see such another. There were some fine archers who drew their
last shaft that day. We shall never see better men, Aylward.�

�By my hilt! no. There was little Robby Withstaff, and Andrew
Salblaster, and Wat Alspaye, who broke the neck of the German. Mon Dieu!
what men they were! Take them how you would, at long butts or short,
hoyles, rounds, or rovers, better bowmen never twirled a shaft over
their thumb-nails.�

�But the fight, Aylward, the fight!� cried several impatiently.

�Let me fill my jack first, boys, for it is a thirsty tale. It was at
the first fall of the leaf that the prince set forth, and he passed
through Auvergne, and Berry, and Anjou, and Touraine. In Auvergne the
maids are kind, but the wines are sour. In Berry it is the women that
are sour, but the wines are rich. Anjou, however, is a very good
land for bowmen, for wine and women are all that heart could wish. In
Touraine I got nothing save a broken pate, but at Vierzon I had a great
good fortune, for I had a golden pyx from the minster, for which I
afterwards got nine Genoan janes from the goldsmith in the Rue
Mont Olive. From thence we went to Bourges, where I had a tunic of
flame-colored silk and a very fine pair of shoes with tassels of silk
and drops of silver.�

�From a stall, Aylward?� asked one of the young archers.

�Nay, from a man's feet, lad. I had reason to think that he might not
need them again, seeing that a thirty-inch shaft had feathered in his
back.�

�And what then, Aylward?�

�On we went, coz, some six thousand of us, until we came to Issodun, and
there again a very great thing befell.�

�A battle, Aylward?�

�Nay, nay; a greater thing than that. There is little to be gained out
of a battle, unless one have the fortune to win a ransom. At Issodun I
and three Welshmen came upon a house which all others had passed, and
we had the profit of it to ourselves. For myself, I had a fine
feather-bed--a thing which you will not see in a long day's journey in
England. You have seen it, Alleyne, and you, John. You will bear me out
that it is a noble bed. We put it on a sutler's mule, and bore it after
the army. It was on my mind that I would lay it by until I came to
start house of mine own, and I have it now in a very safe place near
Lyndhurst.�

�And what then, master-bowman?� asked Hawtayne. �By St. Christopher! it
is indeed a fair and goodly life which you have chosen, for you gather
up the spoil as a Warsash man gathers lobsters, without grace or favor
from any man.�

�You are right, master-shipman,� said another of the older archers.
�It is an old bowyer's rede that the second feather of a fenny goose is
better than the pinion of a tame one. Draw on old lad, for I have come
between you and the clout.�

�On we went then,� said Aylward, after a long pull at his blackjack.
�There were some six thousand of us, with the prince and his knights,
and the feather-bed upon a sutler's mule in the centre. We made great
havoc in Touraine, until we came into Romorantin, where I chanced upon
a gold chain and two bracelets of jasper, which were stolen from me the
same day by a black-eyed wench from the Ardennes. Mon Dieu! there are
some folk who have no fear of Domesday in them, and no sign of grace in
their souls, for ever clutching and clawing at another man's chattels.�

�But the battle, Aylward, the battle!� cried several, amid a burst of
laughter.

�I come to it, my young war-pups. Well, then, the King of France had
followed us with fifty thousand men, and he made great haste to catch
us, but when he had us he scarce knew what to do with us, for we were
so drawn up among hedges and vineyards that they could not come nigh us,
save by one lane. On both sides were archers, men-at-arms and knights
behind, and in the centre the baggage, with my feather-bed upon a
sutler's mule. Three hundred chosen knights came straight for it, and,
indeed, they were very brave men, but such a drift of arrows met them
that few came back. Then came the Germans, and they also fought very
bravely, so that one or two broke through the archers and came as far
as the feather-bed, but all to no purpose. Then out rides our own little
hothead with the patch over his eye, and my Lord Audley with his four
Cheshire squires, and a few others of like kidney, and after them went
the prince and Chandos, and then the whole throng of us, with axe and
sword, for we had shot away our arrows. Ma foi! it was a foolish thing,
for we came forth from the hedges, and there was naught to guard the
baggage had they ridden round behind us. But all went well with us, and
the king was taken, and little Robby Withstaff and I fell in with a wain
with twelve firkins of wine for the king's own table, and, by my hilt!
if you ask me what happened after that, I cannot answer you, nor can
little Robby Withstaff either.�

�And next day?�

�By my faith! we did not tarry long, but we hied back to Bordeaux, where
we came in safety with the King of France and also the feather-bed. I
sold my spoil, mes garcons, for as many gold-pieces as I could hold in
my hufken, and for seven days I lit twelve wax candles upon the altar of
St. Andrew; for if you forget the blessed when things are well with you,
they are very likely to forget you when you have need of them. I have a
score of one hundred and nineteen pounds of wax against the holy Andrew,
and, as he was a very just man, I doubt not that I shall have full weigh
and measure when I have most need of it.�

�Tell me, master Aylward,� cried a young fresh-faced archer at the
further end of the room, �what was this great battle about?�

�Why, you jack-fool, what would it be about save who should wear the
crown of France?�

�I thought that mayhap it might be as to who should have this
feather-bed of thine.�

�If I come down to you, Silas, I may lay my belt across your shoulders,�
 Aylward answered, amid a general shout of laughter. �But it is time
young chickens went to roost when they dare cackle against their elders.
It is late, Simon.�

�Nay, let us have another song.�

�Here is Arnold of Sowley will troll as good a stave as any man in the
Company.�

�Nay, we have one here who is second to none,� said Hawtayne, laying his
hand upon big John's shoulder. �I have heard him on the cog with a voice
like the wave upon the shore. I pray you, friend, to give us 'The Bells
of Milton,' or, if you will, 'The Franklin's Maid.'�

Hordle John drew the back of his hand across his mouth, fixed his eyes
upon the corner of the ceiling, and bellowed forth, in a voice which
made the torches flicker, the southland ballad for which he had been
asked:--

        The franklin he hath gone to roam,
        The franklin's maid she bides at home,
        But she is cold and coy and staid,
        And who may win the franklin's maid?

        There came a knight of high renown
        In bassinet and ciclatoun;
        On bended knee full long he prayed,
        He might not win the franklin's maid.

        There came a squire so debonair
        His dress was rich, his words were fair,
        He sweetly sang, he deftly played:
        He could not win the franklin's maid.

        There came a mercer wonder-fine
        With velvet cap and gaberdine;
        For all his ships, for all his trade
        He could not buy the franklin's maid.

        There came an archer bold and true,
        With bracer guard and stave of yew;
        His purse was light, his jerkin frayed;
        Haro, alas! the franklin's maid!

        Oh, some have laughed and some have cried
        And some have scoured the country-side!
        But off they ride through wood and glade,
        The bowman and the franklin's maid.

A roar of delight from his audience, with stamping of feet and beating
of blackjacks against the ground, showed how thoroughly the song was
to their taste, while John modestly retired into a quart pot, which he
drained in four giant gulps. �I sang that ditty in Hordle ale-house ere
I ever thought to be an archer myself,� quoth he.

�Fill up your stoups!� cried Black Simon, thrusting his own goblet into
the open hogshead in front of him. �Here is a last cup to the White
Company, and every brave boy who walks behind the roses of Loring!�

�To the wood, the flax, and the gander's wing!� said an old gray-headed
archer on the right.

�To a gentle loose, and the King of Spain for a mark at fourteen score!�
 cried another.

�To a bloody war!� shouted a fourth. �Many to go and few to come!�

�With the most gold to the best steel!� added a fifth.

�And a last cup to the maids of our heart!� cried Aylward. �A steady
hand and a true eye, boys; so let two quarts be a bowman's portion.�
 With shout and jest and snatch of song they streamed from the room, and
all was peaceful once more in the �Rose de Guienne.�



CHAPTER XXIII. HOW ENGLAND HELD THE LISTS AT BORDEAUX. So used were the
good burghers of Bordeaux to martial display and knightly sport, that an
ordinary joust or tournament was an everyday matter with them. The fame
and brilliancy of the prince's court had drawn the knights-errant and
pursuivants-of-arms from every part of Europe. In the long lists by the
Garonne on the landward side of the northern gate there had been many a
strange combat, when the Teutonic knight, fresh from the conquest of the
Prussian heathen, ran a course against the knight of Calatrava, hardened
by continual struggle against the Moors, or cavaliers from Portugal
broke a lance with Scandinavian warriors from the further shore of the
great Northern Ocean. Here fluttered many an outland pennon, bearing
symbol and blazonry from the banks of the Danube, the wilds of Lithuania
and the mountain strongholds of Hungary; for chivalry was of no clime
and of no race, nor was any land so wild that the fame and name of the
prince had not sounded through it from border to border.

Great, however, was the excitement through town and district when it
was learned that on the third Wednesday in Advent there would be held
a passage-at-arms in which five knights of England would hold the lists
against all comers. The great concourse of noblemen and famous soldiers,
the national character of the contest, and the fact that this was a last
trial of arms before what promised to be an arduous and bloody war,
all united to make the event one of the most notable and brilliant that
Bordeaux had ever seen. On the eve of the contest the peasants flocked
in from the whole district of the Medoc, and the fields beyond the walls
were whitened with the tents of those who could find no warmer lodging.
From the distant camp of Dax, too, and from Blaye, Bourge, Libourne, St.
Emilion, Castillon, St. Macaire, Cardillac, Ryons, and all the cluster
of flourishing towns which look upon Bordeaux as their mother, there
thronged an unceasing stream of horsemen and of footmen, all converging
upon the great city. By the morning of the day on which the courses were
to be run, not less than eighty people had assembled round the lists
and along the low grassy ridge which looks down upon the scene of the
encounter.

It was, as may well be imagined, no easy matter among so many noted
cavaliers to choose out five on either side who should have precedence
over their fellows. A score of secondary combats had nearly arisen from
the rivalries and bad blood created by the selection, and it was only
the influence of the prince and the efforts of the older barons which
kept the peace among so many eager and fiery soldiers. Not till the day
before the courses were the shields finally hung out for the inspection
of the ladies and the heralds, so that all men might know the names
of the champions and have the opportunity to prefer any charge against
them, should there be stain upon them which should disqualify them from
taking part in so noble and honorable a ceremony.

Sir Hugh Calverley and Sir Robert Knolles had not yet returned from
their raid into the marches of the Navarre, so that the English party
were deprived of two of their most famous lances. Yet there remained so
many good names that Chandos and Felton, to whom the selection had been
referred, had many an earnest consultation, in which every feat of
arms and failure or success of each candidate was weighed and balanced
against the rival claims of his companions. Lord Audley of Cheshire,
the hero of Poictiers, and Loring of Hampshire, who was held to be the
second lance in the army, were easily fixed upon. Then, of the younger
men, Sir Thomas Percy of Northumberland, Sir Thomas Wake of Yorkshire,
and Sir William Beauchamp of Gloucestershire, were finally selected to
uphold the honor of England. On the other side were the veteran Captal
de Buch and the brawny Olivier de Clisson, with the free companion
Sir Perducas d'Albret, the valiant Lord of Mucident, and Sigismond von
Altenstadt, of the Teutonic Order. The older soldiers among the English
shook their heads as they looked upon the escutcheons of these famous
warriors, for they were all men who had spent their lives upon the
saddle, and bravery and strength can avail little against experience and
wisdom of war.

�By my faith! Sir John,� said the prince as he rode through the winding
streets on his way to the list, �I should have been glad to have
splintered a lance to-day. You have seen me hold a spear since I had
strength to lift one, and should know best whether I do not merit a
place among this honorable company.�

�There is no better seat and no truer lance, sire,� said Chandos; �but,
if I may say so without fear of offence, it were not fitting that you
should join in this debate.�

�And why, Sir John?�

�Because, sire, it is not for you to take part with Gascons against
English, or with English against Gascons, seeing that you are lord of
both. We are not too well loved by the Gascons now, and it is but the
golden link of your princely coronet which holds us together. If that be
snapped I know not what would follow.�

�Snapped, Sir John!� cried the prince, with an angry sparkle in his dark
eyes. �What manner of talk is this? You speak as though the allegiance
of our people were a thing which might be thrown off or on like a
falcon's jessel.�

�With a sorry hack one uses whip and spur, sire,� said Chandos; �but
with a horse of blood and spirit a good cavalier is gentle and soothing,
coaxing rather than forcing. These folk are strange people, and you must
hold their love, even as you have it now, for you will get from their
kindness what all the pennons in your army could not wring from them.�

�You are over-grave to-day, John,� the prince answered. �We may keep
such questions for our council-chamber. But how now, my brothers of
Spain, and of Majorca, what think you of this challenge?�

�I look to see some handsome joisting,� said Don Pedro, who rode with
the King of Majorca upon the right of the prince, while Chandos was on
the left. �By St. James of Compostella! but these burghers would bear
some taxing. See to the broadcloth and velvet that the rogues bear upon
their backs! By my troth! if they were my subjects they would be glad
enough to wear falding and leather ere I had done with them. But mayhap
it is best to let the wool grow long ere you clip it.�

�It is our pride,� the prince answered coldly, �that we rule over
freemen and not slaves.�

�Every man to his own humor,� said Pedro carelessly. �Carajo! there is a
sweet face at yonder window! Don Fernando, I pray you to mark the house,
and to have the maid brought to us at the abbey.�

�Nay, brother, nay!� cried the prince impatiently. �I have had occasion
to tell you more than once that things are not ordered in this way in
Aquitaine.�

�A thousand pardons, dear friend,� the Spaniard answered quickly, for a
flush of anger had sprung to the dark cheek of the English prince. �You
make my exile so like a home that I forget at times that I am not in
very truth back in Castile. Every land hath indeed its ways and manners;
but I promise you, Edward, that when you are my guest in Toledo or
Madrid you shall not yearn in vain for any commoner's daughter on whom
you may deign to cast your eye.�

�Your talk, sire,� said the prince still more coldly, �is not such as
I love to hear from your lips. I have no taste for such amours as you
speak of, and I have sworn that my name shall be coupled with that of no
woman save my ever dear wife.�

�Ever the mirror of true chivalry!� exclaimed Pedro, while James of
Majorca, frightened at the stern countenance of their all-powerful
protector, plucked hard at the mantle of his brother exile.

�Have a care, cousin,� he whispered; �for the sake of the Virgin have a
care, for you have angered him.�

�Pshaw! fear not,� the other answered in the same low tone. �If I miss
one stoop I will strike him on the next. Mark me else. Fair cousin,� he
continued, turning to the prince, �these be rare men-at-arms and lusty
bowmen. It would be hard indeed to match them.�

�They have journeyed far, sire, but they have never yet found their
match.�

�Nor ever will, I doubt not. I feel myself to be back upon my throne
when I look at them. But tell me, dear coz, what shall we do next,
when we have driven this bastard Henry from the kingdom which he hath
filched?�

�We shall then compel the King of Aragon to place our good friend and
brother James of Majorca upon the throne.�

�Noble and generous prince!� cried the little monarch.

�That done,� said King Pedro, glancing out of the corners of his eyes
at the young conqueror, �we shall unite the forces of England, of
Aquitaine, of Spain and of Majorca. It would be shame to us if we did
not do some great deed with such forces ready to our hand.�

�You say truly, brother,� cried the prince, his eyes kindling at the
thought. �Methinks that we could not do anything more pleasing to Our
Lady than to drive the heathen Moors out of the country.�

�I am with you, Edward, as true as hilt to blade. But, by St. James!
we shall not let these Moors make mock at us from over the sea. We must
take ship and thrust them from Africa.�

�By heaven, yes!� cried the prince. �And it is the dream of my heart
that our English pennons shall wave upon the Mount of Olives, and the
lions and lilies float over the holy city.�

�And why not, dear coz? Your bowmen have cleared a path to Paris, and
why not to Jerusalem? Once there, your arms might rest.�

�Nay, there is more to be done,� cried the prince, carried away by the
ambitious dream. �There is still the city of Constantine to be taken,
and war to be waged against the Soldan of Damascus. And beyond him again
there is tribute to be levied from the Cham of Tartary and from the
kingdom of Cathay. Ha! John, what say you? Can we not go as far eastward
as Richard of the Lion Heart?�

�Old John will bide at home, sire,� said the rugged soldier. �By my
soul! as long as I am seneschal of Aquitaine I will find enough to do
in guarding the marches which you have entrusted to me. It would be
a blithe day for the King of France when he heard that the seas lay
between him and us.�

�By my soul! John,� said the prince, �I have never known you turn
laggard before.�

�The babbling hound, sire, is not always the first at the mort,� the old
knight answered.

�Nay, my true-heart! I have tried you too often not to know. But, by my
soul! I have not seen so dense a throng since the day that we brought
King John down Cheapside.�

It was indeed an enormous crowd which covered the whole vast plain from
the line of vineyards to the river bank. From the northern gate the
prince and his companions looked down at a dark sea of heads, brightened
here and there by the colored hoods of the women, or by the sparkling
head-pieces of archers and men-at-arms. In the centre of this vast
assemblage the lists seemed but a narrow strip of green marked out with
banners and streamers, while a gleam of white with a flutter of pennons
at either end showed where the marquees were pitched which served as the
dressing-rooms of the combatants. A path had been staked off from the
city gate to the stands which had been erected for the court and the
nobility. Down this, amid the shouts of the enormous multitude, the
prince cantered with his two attendant kings, his high officers of
state, and his long train of lords and ladies, courtiers, counsellors,
and soldiers, with toss of plume and flash of jewel, sheen of silk and
glint of gold--as rich and gallant a show as heart could wish. The head
of the cavalcade had reached the lists ere the rear had come clear of
the city gate, for the fairest and the bravest had assembled from all
the broad lands which are watered by the Dordogne and the Garonne. Here
rode dark-browed cavaliers from the sunny south, fiery soldiers from
Gascony, graceful courtiers of Limousin or Saintonge, and gallant young
Englishmen from beyond the seas. Here too were the beautiful brunettes
of the Gironde, with eyes which out-flashed their jewels, while beside
them rode their blonde sisters of England, clear cut and aquiline,
swathed in swans'-down and in ermine, for the air was biting though
the sun was bright. Slowly the long and glittering train wound into the
lists, until every horse had been tethered by the varlets in waiting,
and every lord and lady seated in the long stands which stretched, rich
in tapestry and velvet and blazoned arms, on either side of the centre
of the arena.

The holders of the lists occupied the end which was nearest to the city
gate. There, in front of their respective pavilions, flew the martlets
of Audley, the roses of Loring, the scarlet bars of Wake, the lion of
the Percies and the silver wings of the Beauchamps, each supported by
a squire clad in hanging green stuff to represent so many Tritons, and
bearing a huge conch-shell in their left hands. Behind the tents the
great war-horses, armed at all points, champed and reared, while their
masters sat at the doors of their pavilions, with their helmets upon
their knees, chatting as to the order of the day's doings. The English
archers and men-at-arms had mustered at that end of the lists, but the
vast majority of the spectators were in favor of the attacking party,
for the English had declined in popularity ever since the bitter dispute
as to the disposal of the royal captive after the battle of Poictiers.
Hence the applause was by no means general when the herald-at-arms
proclaimed, after a flourish of trumpets, the names and styles of the
knights who were prepared, for the honor of their country and for the
love of their ladies, to hold the field against all who might do them
the favor to run a course with them. On the other hand, a deafening
burst of cheering greeted the rival herald, who, advancing from the
other end of the lists, rolled forth the well-known titles of the five
famous warriors who had accepted the defiance.

�Faith, John,� said the prince, �it sounds as though you were right.
Ha! my grace D'Armagnac, it seems that our friends on this side will not
grieve if our English champions lose the day.�

�It may be so, sire,� the Gascon nobleman answered. �I have little doubt
that in Smithfield or at Windsor an English crowd would favor their own
countrymen.�

�By my faith! that's easily seen,� said the prince, laughing, �for a few
score English archers at yonder end are bellowing as though they would
out-shout the mighty multitude. I fear that they will have little to
shout over this tourney, for my gold vase has small prospect of crossing
the water. What are the conditions, John?�

�They are to tilt singly not less than three courses, sire, and the
victory to rest with that party which shall have won the greater number
of courses, each pair continuing till one or other have the vantage. He
who carries himself best of the victors hath the prize, and he who is
judged best of the other party hath a jewelled clasp. Shall I order that
the nakirs sound, sire?�

The prince nodded, and the trumpets rang out, while the champions rode
forth one after the other, each meeting his opponent in the centre of
the lists. Sir William Beauchamp went down before the practiced lance
of the Captal de Buch. Sir Thomas Percy won the vantage over the Lord
of Mucident, and the Lord Audley struck Sir Perducas d'Albret from
the saddle. The burly De Clisson, however, restored the hopes of the
attackers by beating to the ground Sir Thomas Wake of Yorkshire. So far,
there was little to choose betwixt challengers and challenged.

�By Saint James of Santiago!� cried Don Pedro, with a tinge of color
upon his pale cheeks, �win who will, this has been a most notable
contest.�

�Who comes next for England, John?� asked the prince in a voice which
quivered with excitement.

�Sir Nigel Loring of Hampshire, sire.�

�Ha! he is a man of good courage, and skilled in the use of all
weapons.�

�He is indeed, sire. But his eyes, like my own, are the worse for wars.
Yet he can tilt or play his part at hand-strokes as merrily as ever. It
was he, sire, who won the golden crown which Queen Philippa, your royal
mother, gave to be jousted for by all the knights of England after
the harrying of Calais. I have heard that at Twynham Castle there is a
buffet which groans beneath the weight of his prizes.�

�I pray that my vase may join them,� said the prince. �But here is the
cavalier of Germany, and by my soul! he looks like a man of great valor
and hardiness. Let them run their full three courses, for the issue is
over-great to hang upon one.�

As the prince spoke, amid a loud flourish of trumpets and the shouting
of the Gascon party, the last of the assailants rode gallantly into the
lists. He was a man of great size, clad in black armor without blazonry
or ornament of any kind, for all worldly display was forbidden by the
rules of the military brotherhood to which he belonged. No plume or
nobloy fluttered from his plain tilting salade, and even his lance was
devoid of the customary banderole. A white mantle fluttered behind him,
upon the left side of which was marked the broad black cross picked
out with silver which was the well-known badge of the Teutonic Order.
Mounted upon a horse as large, as black, and as forbidding as himself,
he cantered slowly forward, with none of those prancings and gambades
with which a cavalier was accustomed to show his command over his
charger. Gravely and sternly he inclined his head to the prince, and
took his place at the further end of the arena.

He had scarce done so before Sir Nigel rode out from the holders'
enclosure, and galloping at full speed down the lists, drew his charger
up before the prince's stand with a jerk which threw it back upon
its haunches. With white armor, blazoned shield, and plume of
ostrich-feathers from his helmet, he carried himself in so jaunty and
joyous a fashion, with tossing pennon and curveting charger, that a
shout of applause ran the full circle of the arena. With the air of a
man who hastes to a joyous festival, he waved his lance in salute, and
reining the pawing horse round without permitting its fore-feet to touch
the ground, he hastened back to his station.

A great hush fell over the huge multitude as the two last champions
faced each other. A double issue seemed to rest upon their contest, for
their personal fame was at stake as well as their party's honor. Both
were famous warriors, but as their exploits had been performed in widely
sundered countries, they had never before been able to cross lances. A
course between such men would have been enough in itself to cause the
keenest interest, apart from its being the crisis which would decide who
should be the victors of the day. For a moment they waited--the German
sombre and collected, Sir Nigel quivering in every fibre with
eagerness and fiery resolution. Then, amid a long-drawn breath from
the spectators, the glove fell from the marshal's hand, and the two
steel-clad horsemen met like a thunderclap in front of the royal stand.
The German, though he reeled for an instant before the thrust of the
Englishman, struck his opponent so fairly upon the vizor that the laces
burst, the plumed helmet flew to pieces, and Sir Nigel galloped on down
the lists with his bald head shimmering in the sunshine. A thousand
waving scarves and tossing caps announced that the first bout had fallen
to the popular party.

The Hampshire knight was not a man to be disheartened by a reverse. He
spurred back to the pavilion, and was out in a few instants with another
helmet. The second course was so equal that the keenest judges could not
discern any vantage. Each struck fire from the other's shield, and each
endured the jarring shock as though welded to the horse beneath him. In
the final bout, however, Sir Nigel struck his opponent with so true an
aim that the point of the lance caught between the bars of his vizor and
tore the front of his helmet out, while the German, aiming somewhat
low, and half stunned by the shock, had the misfortune to strike his
adversary upon the thigh, a breach of the rules of the tilting-yard, by
which he not only sacrificed his chances of success, but would also
have forfeited his horse and his armor, had the English knight chosen
to claim them. A roar of applause from the English soldiers, with an
ominous silence from the vast crowd who pressed round the barriers,
announced that the balance of victory lay with the holders. Already the
ten champions had assembled in front of the prince to receive his award,
when a harsh bugle call from the further end of the lists drew all eyes
to a new and unexpected arrival.



CHAPTER XXIV. HOW A CHAMPION CAME FORTH FROM THE EAST.


The Bordeaux lists were, as has already been explained, situated
upon the plain near the river upon those great occasions when the
tilting-ground in front of the Abbey of St. Andrew's was deemed to be
too small to contain the crowd. On the eastern side of this plain the
country-side sloped upwards, thick with vines in summer, but now ridged
with the brown bare enclosures. Over the gently rising plain curved the
white road which leads inland, usually flecked with travellers, but now
with scarce a living form upon it, so completely had the lists drained
all the district of its inhabitants. Strange it was to see such a vast
concourse of people, and then to look upon that broad, white, empty
highway which wound away, bleak and deserted, until it narrowed itself
to a bare streak against the distant uplands.

Shortly after the contest had begun, any one looking from the lists
along this road might have remarked, far away in the extreme distance,
two brilliant and sparkling points which glittered and twinkled in
the bright shimmer of the winter sun. Within an hour these had become
clearer and nearer, until they might be seen to come from the reflection
from the head-pieces of two horsemen who were riding at the top of their
speed in the direction of Bordeaux. Another half-hour had brought
them so close that every point of their bearing and equipment could be
discerned. The first was a knight in full armor, mounted upon a brown
horse with a white blaze upon breast and forehead. He was a short man of
great breadth of shoulder, with vizor closed, and no blazonry upon his
simple white surcoat or plain black shield. The other, who was evidently
his squire and attendant, was unarmed save for the helmet upon his
head, but bore in his right hand a very long and heavy oaken spear which
belonged to his master. In his left hand the squire held not only the
reins of his own horse but those of a great black war-horse, fully
harnessed, which trotted along at his side. Thus the three horses and
their two riders rode swiftly to the lists, and it was the blare of the
trumpet sounded by the squire as his lord rode into the arena which
had broken in upon the prize-giving and drawn away the attention and
interest of the spectators.

�Ha, John!� cried the prince, craning his neck, �who is this cavalier,
and what is it that he desires?�

�On my word, sire,� replied Chandos, with the utmost surprise upon his
face, �it is my opinion that he is a Frenchman.�

�A Frenchman!� repeated Don Pedro. �And how can you tell that, my Lord
Chandos, when he has neither coat-armor, crest, or blazonry?�

�By his armor, sire, which is rounder at elbow and at shoulder than any
of Bordeaux or of England. Italian he might be were his bassinet more
sloped, but I will swear that those plates were welded betwixt this and
Rhine. Here comes his squire, however, and we shall hear what strange
fortune hath brought him over the marches.�

As he spoke the attendant cantered up the grassy enclosure, and pulling
up his steed in front of the royal stand, blew a second fanfare upon
his bugle. He was a raw-boned, swarthy-cheeked man, with black bristling
beard and a swaggering bearing.

Having sounded his call, he thrust the bugle into his belt, and, pushing
his way betwixt the groups of English and of Gascon knights, he reined
up within a spear's length of the royal party.

�I come,� he shouted in a hoarse, thick voice, with a strong Breton
accent, �as squire and herald from my master, who is a very valiant
pursuivant-of-arms, and a liegeman to the great and powerful monarch,
Charles, king of the French. My master has heard that there is jousting
here, and prospect of honorable advancement, so he has come to ask that
some English cavalier will vouchsafe for the love of his lady to run a
course with sharpened lances with him, or to meet him with sword, mace,
battle-axe, or dagger. He bade me say, however, that he would fight only
with a true Englishman, and not with any mongrel who is neither English
nor French, but speaks with the tongue of the one, and fights under the
banner of the other.�

�Sir!� cried De Clisson, with a voice of thunder, while his countrymen
clapped their hands to their swords. The squire, however, took no notice
of their angry faces, but continued with his master's message.

�He is now ready, sire,� he said, �albeit his destrier has travelled
many miles this day, and fast, for we were in fear lest we come too late
for the jousting.�

�Ye have indeed come too late,� said the prince, �seeing that the prize
is about to be awarded; yet I doubt not that one of these gentlemen will
run a course for the sake of honor with this cavalier of France.�

�And as to the prize, sire,� quoth Sir Nigel, �I am sure that I speak
for all when I say this French knight hath our leave to bear it away
with him if he can fairly win it.�

�Bear word of this to your master,� said the prince, �and ask him which
of these five Englishmen he would desire to meet. But stay; your master
bears no coat-armor, and we have not yet heard his name.�

�My master, sire, is under vow to the Virgin neither to reveal his name
nor to open his vizor until he is back upon French ground once more.�

�Yet what assurance have we,� said the prince, �that this is not some
varlet masquerading in his master's harness, or some caitiff knight,
the very touch of whose lance might bring infamy upon an honorable
gentleman?�

�It is not so, sire,� cried the squire earnestly. �There is no man upon
earth who would demean himself by breaking a lance with my master.�

�You speak out boldly, squire,� the prince answered; �but unless I have
some further assurance of your master's noble birth and gentle name I
cannot match the choicest lances of my court against him.�

�You refuse, sire?�

�I do refuse.�

�Then, sire, I was bidden to ask you from my master whether you would
consent if Sir John Chandos, upon hearing my master's name, should
assure you that he was indeed a man with whom you might yourself cross
swords without indignity.�

�I ask no better,� said the prince.

�Then I must ask, Lord Chandos, that you will step forth. I have your
pledge that the name shall remain ever a secret, and that you will
neither say nor write one word which might betray it. The name is----�
 He stooped down from his horse and whispered something into the old
knight's ear which made him start with surprise, and stare with much
curiosity at the distant Knight, who was sitting his charger at the
further end of the arena.

�Is this indeed sooth?� he exclaimed.

�It is, my lord, and I swear it by St. Ives of Brittany.�

�I might have known it,� said Chandos, twisting his moustache, and still
looking thoughtfully at the cavalier.

�What then, Sir John?� asked the prince.

�Sire, this is a knight whom it is indeed great honor to meet, and I
would that your grace would grant me leave to send my squire for my
harness, for I would dearly love to run a course with him.�

�Nay, nay, Sir John, you have gained as much honor as one man can bear,
and it were hard if you could not rest now. But I pray you, squire, to
tell your master that he is very welcome to our court, and that wines
and spices will be served him, if he would refresh himself before
jousting.�

�My master will not drink,� said the squire.

�Let him then name the gentleman with whom he would break a spear.�

�He would contend with these five knights, each to choose such weapons
as suit him best.�

�I perceive,� said the prince, �that your master is a man of great heart
and high of enterprise. But the sun already is low in the west, and
there will scarce be light for these courses. I pray you, gentlemen, to
take your places, that we may see whether this stranger's deeds are as
bold as his words.�

The unknown knight had sat like a statue of steel, looking neither to
the right nor to the left during these preliminaries. He had changed
from the horse upon which he had ridden, and bestrode the black charger
which his squire had led beside him. His immense breadth, his stern
composed appearance, and the mode in which he handled his shield and his
lance, were enough in themselves to convince the thousands of critical
spectators that he was a dangerous opponent. Aylward, who stood in
the front row of the archers with Simon, big John, and others of the
Company, had been criticising the proceedings from the commencement with
the ease and freedom of a man who had spent his life under arms and had
learned in a hard school to know at a glance the points of a horse and
his rider. He stared now at the stranger with a wrinkled brow and the
air of a man who is striving to stir his memory.

�By my hilt! I have seen the thick body of him before to-day. Yet I
cannot call to mind where it could have been. At Nogent belike, or was
it at Auray? Mark me, lads, this man will prove to be one of the best
lances of France, and there are no better in the world.�

�It is but child's play, this poking game,� said John. �I would fain
try my hand at it, for, by the black rood! I think that it might be
amended.�

�What then would you do, John?� asked several.

�There are many things which might be done,� said the forester
thoughtfully. �Methinks that I would begin by breaking my spear.�

�So they all strive to do.�

�Nay, but not upon another man's shield. I would break it over my own
knee.�

�And what the better for that, old beef and bones?� asked Black Simon.

�So I would turn what is but a lady's bodkin of a weapon into a very
handsome club.�

�And then, John?�

�Then I would take the other's spear into my arm or my leg, or where
it pleased him best to put it, and I would dash out his brains with my
club.�

�By my ten finger-bones! old John,� said Aylward, �I would give my
feather-bed to see you at a spear-running. This is a most courtly and
gentle sport which you have devised.�

�So it seems to me,� said John seriously. �Or, again, one might seize
the other round the middle, pluck him off his horse and bear him to the
pavilion, there to hold him to ransom.�

�Good!� cried Simon, amid a roar of laughter from all the archers round.
�By Thomas of Kent! we shall make a camp-marshal of thee, and thou
shalt draw up rules for our jousting. But, John, who is it that you
would uphold in this knightly and pleasing fashion?�

�What mean you?�

�Why, John, so strong and strange a tilter must fight for the brightness
of his lady's eyes or the curve of her eyelash, even as Sir Nigel does
for the Lady Loring.�

�I know not about that,� said the big archer, scratching his head in
perplexity. �Since Mary hath played me false, I can scarce fight for
her.�

�Yet any woman will serve.�

�There is my mother then,� said John. �She was at much pains at my
upbringing, and, by my soul! I will uphold the curve of her eyelashes,
for it tickleth my very heart-root to think of her. But who is here?�

�It is Sir William Beauchamp. He is a valiant man, but I fear that he is
scarce firm enough upon the saddle to bear the thrust of such a tilter
as this stranger promises to be.�

Aylward's words were speedily justified, for even as he spoke the two
knights met in the centre of the lists. Beauchamp struck his opponent a
shrewd blow upon the helmet, but was met with so frightful a thrust that
he whirled out of his saddle and rolled over and over upon the ground.
Sir Thomas Percy met with little better success, for his shield was
split, his vambrace torn and he himself wounded slightly in the side.
Lord Audley and the unknown knight struck each other fairly upon the
helmet; but, while the stranger sat as firm and rigid as ever upon his
charger, the Englishman was bent back to his horse's cropper by the
weight of the blow, and had galloped half-way down the lists ere he
could recover himself. Sir Thomas Wake was beaten to the ground with a
battle-axe--that being the weapon which he had selected--and had to be
carried to his pavilion. These rapid successes, gained one after the
other over four celebrated warriors, worked the crowd up to a pitch of
wonder and admiration. Thunders of applause from the English soldiers,
as well as from the citizens and peasants, showed how far the love of
brave and knightly deeds could rise above the rivalries of race.

�By my soul! John,� cried the prince, with his cheek flushed and his
eyes shining, �this is a man of good courage and great hardiness. I
could not have thought that there was any single arm upon earth which
could have overthrown these four champions.�

�He is indeed, as I have said, sire, a knight from whom much honor is to
be gained. But the lower edge of the sun is wet, and it will be beneath
the sea ere long.�

�Here is Sir Nigel Loring, on foot and with his sword,� said the prince.
�I have heard that he is a fine swordsman.�

�The finest in your army, sire,� Chandos answered. �Yet I doubt not that
he will need all his skill this day.�

As he spoke, the two combatants advanced from either end in full armor
with their two-handed swords sloping over their shoulders. The stranger
walked heavily and with a measured stride, while the English knight
advanced as briskly as though there was no iron shell to weigh down the
freedom of his limbs. At four paces distance they stopped, eyed each
other for a moment, and then in an instant fell to work with a clatter
and clang as though two sturdy smiths were busy upon their anvils. Up
and down went the long, shining blades, round and round they circled in
curves of glimmering light, crossing, meeting, disengaging, with flash
of sparks at every parry. Here and there bounded Sir Nigel, his head
erect, his jaunty plume fluttering in the air, while his dark opponent
sent in crashing blow upon blow, following fiercely up with cut and with
thrust, but never once getting past the practised blade of the skilled
swordsman. The crowd roared with delight as Sir Nigel would stoop his
head to avoid a blow, or by some slight movement of his body allow some
terrible thrust to glance harmlessly past him. Suddenly, however, his
time came. The Frenchman, whirling up his sword, showed for an instant
a chink betwixt his shoulder piece and the rerebrace which guarded his
upper arm. In dashed Sir Nigel, and out again so swiftly that the eye
could not follow the quick play of his blade, but a trickle of blood
from the stranger's shoulder, and a rapidly widening red smudge upon his
white surcoat, showed where the thrust had taken effect. The wound was,
however, but a slight one, and the Frenchman was about to renew his
onset, when, at a sign from the prince, Chandos threw down his baton,
and the marshals of the lists struck up the weapons and brought the
contest to an end.

�It were time to check it,� said the prince, smiling, �for Sir Nigel is
too good a man for me to lose, and, by the five holy wounds! if one of
those cuts came home I should have fears for our champion. What think
you, Pedro?�

�I think, Edward, that the little man was very well able to take care of
himself. For my part, I should wish to see so well matched a pair fight
on while a drop of blood remained in their veins.�

�We must have speech with him. Such a man must not go from my court
without rest or sup. Bring him hither, Chandos, and, certes, if the Lord
Loring hath resigned his claim upon this goblet, it is right and proper
that this cavalier should carry it to France with him as a sign of the
prowess that he has shown this day.�

As he spoke, the knight-errant, who had remounted his warhorse, galloped
forward to the royal stand, with a silken kerchief bound round his
wounded arm. The setting sun cast a ruddy glare upon his burnished
arms, and sent his long black shadow streaming behind him up the level
clearing. Pulling up his steed, he slightly inclined his head, and
sat in the stern and composed fashion with which he had borne himself
throughout, heedless of the applauding shouts and the flutter of
kerchiefs from the long lines of brave men and of fair women who were
looking down upon him.

�Sir knight,� said the prince, �we have all marvelled this day at this
great skill and valor with which God has been pleased to endow you.
I would fain that you should tarry at our court, for a time at least,
until your hurt is healed and your horses rested.�

�My hurt is nothing, sire, nor are my horses weary,� returned the
stranger in a deep, stern voice.

�Will you not at least hie back to Bordeaux with us, that you may drain
a cup of muscadine and sup at our table?�

�I will neither drink your wine nor sit at your table,� returned the
other. �I bear no love for you or for your race, and there is nought
that I wish at your hands until the day when I see the last sail which
bears you back to your island vanishing away against the western sky.�

�These are bitter words, sir knight,� said Prince Edward, with an angry
frown.

�And they come from a bitter heart,� answered the unknown knight. �How
long is it since there has been peace in my hapless country? Where are
the steadings, and orchards, and vineyards, which made France fair?
Where are the cities which made her great? From Providence to Burgundy
we are beset by every prowling hireling in Christendom, who rend and
tear the country which you have left too weak to guard her own marches.
Is it not a by-word that a man may ride all day in that unhappy land
without seeing thatch upon roof or hearing the crow of cock? Does not
one fair kingdom content you, that you should strive so for this other
one which has no love for you? Pardieu! a true Frenchman's words may
well be bitter, for bitter is his lot and bitter his thoughts as he
rides through his thrice unhappy country.�

�Sir knight,� said the prince, �you speak like a brave man, and our
cousin of France is happy in having a cavalier who is so fit to uphold
his cause either with tongue or with sword. But if you think such evil
of us, how comes it that you have trusted yourselves to us without
warranty or safe-conduct?�

�Because I knew that you would be here, sire. Had the man who sits upon
your right been ruler of this land, I had indeed thought twice before I
looked to him for aught that was knightly or generous.� With a soldierly
salute, he wheeled round his horse, and, galloping down the lists,
disappeared amid the dense crowd of footmen and of horsemen who were
streaming away from the scene of the tournament.

�The insolent villain!� cried Pedro, glaring furiously after him. �I
have seen a man's tongue torn from his jaws for less. Would it not be
well even now, Edward, to send horsemen to hale him back? Bethink you
that it may be one of the royal house of France, or at least some knight
whose loss would be a heavy blow to his master. Sir William Felton, you
are well mounted, gallop after the caitiff, I pray you.�

�Do so, Sir William,� said the prince, �and give him this purse of a
hundred nobles as a sign of the respect which I bear for him; for,
by St. George! he has served his master this day even as I would wish
liegeman of mine to serve me.� So saying, the prince turned his back
upon the King of Spain, and springing upon his horse, rode slowly
homewards to the Abbey of Saint Andrew's.



CHAPTER XXV. HOW SIR NIGEL WROTE TO TWYNHAM CASTLE.


On the morning after the jousting, when Alleyne Edricson went, as was
his custom, into his master's chamber to wait upon him in his dressing
and to curl his hair, he found him already up and very busily at work.
He sat at a table by the window, a deer-hound on one side of him and a
lurcher on the other, his feet tucked away under the trestle on which
he sat, and his tongue in his cheek, with the air of a man who is much
perplexed. A sheet of vellum lay upon the board in front of him, and
he held a pen in his hand, with which he had been scribbling in a rude
schoolboy hand. So many were the blots, however, and so numerous the
scratches and erasures, that he had at last given it up in despair, and
sat with his single uncovered eye cocked upwards at the ceiling, as one
who waits upon inspiration.

�By Saint Paul!� he cried, as Alleyne entered, �you are the man who will
stand by me in this matter. I have been in sore need of you, Alleyne.�

�God be with you, my fair lord!� the squire answered. �I trust that you
have taken no hurt from all that you have gone through yesterday.�

�Nay; I feel the fresher for it, Alleyne. It has eased my joints, which
were somewhat stiff from these years of peace. I trust, Alleyne, that
thou didst very carefully note and mark the bearing and carriage of
this knight of France; for it is time, now when you are young, that you
should see all that is best, and mould your own actions in accordance.
This was a man from whom much honor might be gained, and I have seldom
met any one for whom I have conceived so much love and esteem. Could
I but learn his name, I should send you to him with my cartel, that we
might have further occasion to watch his goodly feats of arms.�

�It is said, my fair lord, that none know his name save only the Lord
Chandos, and that he is under vow not to speak it. So ran the gossip at
the squires' table.�

�Be he who he might, he was a very hardy gentleman. But I have a task
here, Alleyne, which is harder to me than aught that was set before me
yesterday.�

�Can I help you, my lord?�

�That indeed you can. I have been writing my greetings to my sweet wife;
for I hear that a messenger goes from the prince to Southampton within
the week, and he would gladly take a packet for me. I pray you, Alleyne,
to cast your eyes upon what I have written, and see it they are such
words as my lady will understand. My fingers, as you can see, are more
used to iron and leather than to the drawing of strokes and turning of
letters. What then? Is there aught amiss, that you should stare so?�

�It is this first word, my lord. In what tongue were you pleased to
write?�

�In English; for my lady talks it more than she doth French.

�Yet this is no English word, my sweet lord. Here are four t's and never
a letter betwixt them.�

�By St. Paul! it seemed strange to my eye when I wrote it,� said Sir
Nigel. �They bristle up together like a clump of lances. We must break
their ranks and set them farther apart. The word is 'that.' Now I will
read it to you, Alleyne, and you shall write it out fair; for we leave
Bordeaux this day, and it would be great joy to me to think that the
Lady Loring had word from me.�

Alleyne sat down as ordered, with a pen in his hand and a fresh sheet
of parchment before him, while Sir Nigel slowly spelled out his letter,
running his forefinger on from word to word.

�That my heart is with thee, my dear sweeting, is what thine own heart
will assure thee of. All is well with us here, save that Pepin hath
the mange on his back, and Pommers hath scarce yet got clear of his
stiffness from being four days on ship-board, and the more so because
the sea was very high, and we were like to founder on account of a hole
in her side, which was made by a stone cast at us by certain sea-rovers,
who may the saints have in their keeping, for they have gone from
amongst us, as has young Terlake, and two-score mariners and archers,
who would be the more welcome here as there is like to be a very fine
war, with much honor and all hopes of advancement, for which I go to
gather my Company together, who are now at Montaubon, where they pillage
and destroy; yet I hope that, by God's help, I may be able to show that
I am their master, even as, my sweet lady, I am thy servant.�

�How of that, Alleyne?� continued Sir Nigel, blinking at his squire,
with an expression of some pride upon his face. �Have I not told her all
that hath befallen us?�

�You have said much, my fair lord; and yet, if I may say so, it is
somewhat crowded together, so that my Lady Loring can, mayhap, scarce
follow it. Were it in shorter periods----�

�Nay, it boots me not how you marshal them, as long as they are all
there at the muster. Let my lady have the words, and she will place
them in such order as pleases her best. But I would have you add what it
would please her to know.�

�That will I,� said Alleyne, blithely, and bent to the task.

�My fair lady and mistress,� he wrote, �God hath had us in His keeping,
and my lord is well and in good cheer. He hath won much honor at the
jousting before the prince, when he alone was able to make it good
against a very valiant man from France. Touching the moneys, there is
enough and to spare until we reach Montaubon. Herewith, my fair lady,
I send my humble regards, entreating you that you will give the same
to your daughter, the Lady Maude. May the holy saints have you both in
their keeping is ever the prayer of thy servant,

        �ALLEYNE EDRICSON.�

�That is very fairly set forth,� said Sir Nigel, nodding his bald head
as each sentence was read to him. �And for thyself, Alleyne, if there be
any dear friend to whom you would fain give greeting, I can send it for
thee within this packet.�

�There is none,� said Alleyne, sadly.

�Have you no kinsfolk, then?�

�None, save my brother.�

�Ha! I had forgotten that there was ill blood betwixt you. But are there
none in all England who love thee?�

�None that I dare say so.�

�And none whom you love?�

�Nay, I will not say that,� said Alleyne.

Sir Nigel shook his head and laughed softly to himself, �I see how it
is with you,� he said. �Have I not noted your frequent sighs and vacant
eye? Is she fair?�

�She is indeed,� cried Alleyne from his heart, all tingling at this
sudden turn of the talk.

�And good?�

�As an angel.�

�And yet she loves you not?�

�Nay, I cannot say that she loves another.�

�Then you have hopes?�

�I could not live else.�

�Then must you strive to be worthy of her love. Be brave and pure,
fearless to the strong and humble to the weak; and so, whether this love
prosper or no, you will have fitted yourself to be honored by a maiden's
love, which is, in sooth, the highest guerdon which a true knight can
hope for.�

�Indeed, my lord, I do so strive,� said Alleyne; �but she is so sweet,
so dainty, and of so noble a spirit, that I fear me that I shall never
be worthy of her.�

�By thinking so you become worthy. Is she then of noble birth?�

�She is, my lord,� faltered Alleyne.

�Of a knightly house?�

�Yes.�

�Have a care, Alleyne, have a care!� said Sir Nigel, kindly. �The higher
the steed the greater the fall. Hawk not at that which may be beyond thy
flight.�

�My lord, I know little of the ways and usages of the world,� cried
Alleyne, �but I would fain ask your rede upon the matter. You have known
my father and my kin: is not my family one of good standing and repute?�

�Beyond all question.�

�And yet you warn me that I must not place my love too high.�

�Were Minstead yours, Alleyne, then, by St. Paul! I cannot think that
any family in the land would not be proud to take you among them, seeing
that you come of so old a strain. But while the Socman lives----Ha, by
my soul! if this is not Sir Oliver's step I am the more mistaken.�

As he spoke, a heavy footfall was heard without, and the portly knight
flung open the door and strode into the room.

�Why, my little coz,� said he, �I have come across to tell you that
I live above the barber's in the Rue de la Tour, and that there is a
venison pasty in the oven and two flasks of the right vintage on the
table. By St. James! a blind man might find the place, for one has but
to get in the wind from it, and follow the savory smell. Put on your
cloak, then, and come, for Sir Walter Hewett and Sir Robert Briquet,
with one or two others, are awaiting us.�

�Nay, Oliver, I cannot be with you, for I must to Montaubon this day.�

�To Montaubon? But I have heard that your Company is to come with my
forty Winchester rascals to Dax.�

�If you will take charge of them, Oliver. For I will go to Montaubon
with none save my two squires and two archers. Then, when I have found
the rest of my Company I shall lead them to Dax. We set forth this
morning.�

�Then I must back to my pasty,� said Sir Oliver. �You will find us at
Dax, I doubt not, unless the prince throw me into prison, for he is very
wroth against me.�

�And why, Oliver?�

�Pardieu! because I have sent my cartel, gauntlet, and defiance to Sir
John Chandos and to Sir William Felton.�

�To Chandos? In God's name, Oliver, why have you done this?�

�Because he and the other have used me despitefully.�

�And how?�

�Because they have passed me over in choosing those who should joust for
England. Yourself and Audley I could pass, coz, for you are mature men;
but who are Wake, and Percy, and Beauchamp? By my soul! I was prodding
for my food into a camp-kettle when they were howling for their pap. Is
a man of my weight and substance to be thrown aside for the first three
half-grown lads who have learned the trick of the tilt-yard? But hark
ye, coz, I think of sending my cartel also to the prince.�

�Oliver! Oliver! You are mad!�

�Not I, i' faith! I care not a denier whether he be prince or no. By
Saint James! I see that your squire's eyes are starting from his head
like a trussed crab. Well, friend, we are all three men of Hampshire,
and not lightly to be jeered at.�

�Has he jeered at you than?�

�Pardieu! yes, 'Old Sir Oliver's heart is still stout,' said one of his
court. 'Else had it been out of keeping with the rest of him,' quoth the
prince. 'And his arm is strong,' said another. 'So is the backbone of
his horse,' quoth the prince. This very day I will send him my cartel
and defiance.�

�Nay, nay, my dear Oliver,� said Sir Nigel, laying his hand upon his
angry friend's arm. �There is naught in this, for it was but saying that
you were a strong and robust man, who had need of a good destrier. And
as to Chandos and Felton, bethink you that if when you yourself were
young the older lances had ever been preferred, how would you then have
had the chance to earn the good name and fame which you now bear? You do
not ride as light as you did, Oliver, and I ride lighter by the weight
of my hair, but it would be an ill thing if in the evening of our lives
we showed that our hearts were less true and loyal than of old. If such
a knight as Sir Oliver Buttesthorn may turn against his own prince for
the sake of a light word, then where are we to look for steadfast faith
and constancy?�

�Ah! my dear little coz, it is easy to sit in the sunshine and preach to
the man in the shadow. Yet you could ever win me over to your side with
that soft voice of yours. Let us think no more of it then. But, holy
Mother! I had forgot the pasty, and it will be as scorched as Judas
Iscariot! Come, Nigel, lest the foul fiend get the better of me again.�

�For one hour, then; for we march at mid-day. Tell Aylward, Alleyne,
that he is to come with me to Montaubon, and to choose one archer for
his comrade. The rest will to Dax when the prince starts, which will be
before the feast of the Epiphany. Have Pommers ready at mid-day with my
sycamore lance, and place my harness on the sumpter mule.�

With these brief directions, the two old soldiers strode off together,
while Alleyne hastened to get all in order for their journey.



CHAPTER XXVI. HOW THE THREE COMRADES GAINED A MIGHTY TREASURE


It was a bright, crisp winter's day when the little party set off from
Bordeaux on their journey to Montaubon, where the missing half of their
Company had last been heard of. Sir Nigel and Ford had ridden on in
advance, the knight upon his hackney, while his great war-horse trotted
beside his squire. Two hours later Alleyne Edricson followed; for he had
the tavern reckoning to settle, and many other duties which fell to him
as squire of the body. With him came Aylward and Hordle John, armed
as of old, but mounted for their journey upon a pair of clumsy Landes
horses, heavy-headed and shambling, but of great endurance, and capable
of jogging along all day, even when between the knees of the huge
archer, who turned the scale at two hundred and seventy pounds. They
took with them the sumpter mules, which carried in panniers the wardrobe
and table furniture of Sir Nigel; for the knight, though neither fop nor
epicure, was very dainty in small matters, and loved, however bare the
board or hard the life, that his napery should still be white and his
spoon of silver.

There had been frost during the night, and the white hard road rang loud
under their horses' irons as they spurred through the east gate of the
town, along the same broad highway which the unknown French champion
had traversed on the day of the jousts. The three rode abreast, Alleyne
Edricson with his eyes cast down and his mind distrait, for his thoughts
were busy with the conversation which he had had with Sir Nigel in the
morning. Had he done well to say so much, or had he not done better to
have said more? What would the knight have said had he confessed to his
love for the Lady Maude? Would he cast him off in disgrace, or might he
chide him as having abused the shelter of his roof? It had been ready
upon his tongue to tell him all when Sir Oliver had broken in upon them.
Perchance Sir Nigel, with his love of all the dying usages of chivalry,
might have contrived some strange ordeal or feat of arms by which his
love should be put to the test. Alleyne smiled as he wondered what
fantastic and wondrous deed would be exacted from him. Whatever it was,
he was ready for it, whether it were to hold the lists in the court of
the King of Tartary, to carry a cartel to the Sultan of Baghdad, or to
serve a term against the wild heathen of Prussia. Sir Nigel had said
that his birth was high enough for any lady, if his fortune could but
be amended. Often had Alleyne curled his lip at the beggarly craving for
land or for gold which blinded man to the higher and more lasting issues
of life. Now it seemed as though it were only by this same land and gold
that he might hope to reach his heart's desire. But then, again, the
Socman of Minstead was no friend to the Constable of Twynham Castle. It
might happen that, should he amass riches by some happy fortune of war,
this feud might hold the two families aloof. Even if Maude loved him, he
knew her too well to think that she would wed him without the blessing
of her father. Dark and murky was it all, but hope mounts high in youth,
and it ever fluttered over all the turmoil of his thoughts like a white
plume amid the shock of horsemen.

If Alleyne Edricson had enough to ponder over as he rode through the
bare plains of Guienne, his two companions were more busy with the
present and less thoughtful of the future. Aylward rode for half a mile
with his chin upon his shoulder, looking back at a white kerchief which
fluttered out of the gable window of a high house which peeped over the
corner of the battlements. When at last a dip of the road hid it from
his view, he cocked his steel cap, shrugged his broad shoulders, and
rode on with laughter in his eyes, and his weather-beaten face all
ashine with pleasant memories. John also rode in silence, but his eyes
wandered slowly from one side of the road to the other, and he stared
and pondered and nodded his head like a traveller who makes his notes
and saves them up for the re-telling.

�By the rood!� he broke out suddenly, slapping his thigh with his great
red hand, �I knew that there was something a-missing, but I could not
bring to my mind what it was.�

�What was it then?� asked Alleyne, coming with a start out of his
reverie.

�Why, it is the hedgerows,� roared John, with a shout of laughter. �The
country is all scraped as clear as a friar's poll. But indeed I cannot
think much of the folk in these parts. Why do they not get to work and
dig up these long rows of black and crooked stumps which I see on every
hand? A franklin of Hampshire would think shame to have such litter upon
his soil.�

�Thou foolish old John!� quoth Aylward. �You should know better, since
I have heard that the monks of Beaulieu could squeeze a good cup of
wine from their own grapes. Know then that if these rows were dug up
the wealth of the country would be gone, and mayhap there would be dry
throats and gaping mouths in England, for in three months' time these
black roots will blossom and shoot and burgeon, and from them will come
many a good ship-load of Medoc and Gascony which will cross the narrow
seas. But see the church in the hollow, and the folk who cluster in the
churchyard! By my hilt! it is a burial, and there is a passing bell!�
 He pulled off his steel cap as he spoke and crossed himself, with a
muttered prayer for the repose of the dead.

�There too,� remarked Alleyne, as they rode on again, �that which seems
to the eye to be dead is still full of the sap of life, even as the
vines were. Thus God hath written Himself and His laws very broadly on
all that is around us, if our poor dull eyes and duller souls could but
read what He hath set before us.�

�Ha! mon petit,� cried the bowman, �you take me back to the days when
you were new fledged, as sweet a little chick as ever pecked his way
out of a monkish egg. I had feared that in gaining our debonair young
man-at-arms we had lost our soft-spoken clerk. In truth, I have noted
much change in you since we came from Twynham Castle.�

�Surely it would be strange else, seeing that I have lived in a world
so new to me. Yet I trust that there are many things in which I have not
changed. If I have turned to serve an earthly master, and to carry arms
for an earthly king, it would be an ill thing if I were to lose all
thought of the great high King and Master of all, whose humble and
unworthy servant I was ere ever I left Beaulieu. You, John, are also
from the cloisters, but I trow that you do not feel that you have
deserted the old service in taking on the new.�

�I am a slow-witted man,� said John, �and, in sooth, when I try to think
about such matters it casts a gloom upon me. Yet I do not look upon
myself as a worse man in an archer's jerkin than I was in a white cowl,
if that be what you mean.�

�You have but changed from one white company to the other,� quoth
Aylward. �But, by these ten finger-bones! it is a passing strange thing
to me to think that it was but in the last fall of the leaf that we
walked from Lyndhurst together, he so gentle and maidenly, and you,
John, like a great red-limbed overgrown moon-calf; and now here you
are as sprack a squire and as lusty an archer as ever passed down the
highway from Bordeaux, while I am still the same old Samkin Aylward,
with never a change, save that I have a few more sins on my soul and a
few less crowns in my pouch. But I have never yet heard, John, what the
reason was why you should come out of Beaulieu.�

�There were seven reasons,� said John thoughtfully. �The first of them
was that they threw me out.�

�Ma foi! camarade, to the devil with the other six! That is enough for
me and for thee also. I can see that they are very wise and discreet
folk at Beaulieu. Ah! mon ange, what have you in the pipkin?�

�It is milk, worthy sir,� answered the peasant-maid, who stood by the
door of a cottage with a jug in her hand. �Would it please you, gentles,
that I should bring you out three horns of it?�

�Nay, ma petite, but here is a two-sous piece for thy kindly tongue and
for the sight of thy pretty face. Ma foi! but she has a bonne mine. I
have a mind to bide and speak with her.�

�Nay, nay, Aylward,� cried Alleyne. �Sir Nigel will await us, and he in
haste.�

�True, true, camarade! Adieu, ma cherie! mon coeur est toujours a
toi. Her mother is a well-grown woman also. See where she digs by the
wayside. Ma foi! the riper fruit is ever the sweeter. Bon jour, ma belle
dame! God have you in his keeping! Said Sir Nigel where he would await
us?�

�At Marmande or Aiguillon. He said that we could not pass him, seeing
that there is but the one road.�

�Aye, and it is a road that I know as I know the Midhurst parish
butts,� quoth the bowman. �Thirty times have I journeyed it, forward and
backward, and, by the twang of string! I am wont to come back this way
more laden than I went. I have carried all that I had into France in
a wallet, and it hath taken four sumpter-mules to carry it back again.
God's benison on the man who first turned his hand to the making of war!
But there, down in the dingle, is the church of Cardillac, and you may
see the inn where three poplars grow beyond the village. Let us on, for
a stoup of wine would hearten us upon our way.�

The highway had lain through the swelling vineyard country, which
stretched away to the north and east in gentle curves, with many a
peeping spire and feudal tower, and cluster of village houses, all clear
cut and hard in the bright wintry air. To their right stretched the blue
Garonne, running swiftly seawards, with boats and barges dotted over its
broad bosom. On the other side lay a strip of vineyard, and beyond it
the desolate and sandy region of the Landes, all tangled with faded
gorse and heath and broom, stretching away in unbroken gloom to the blue
hills which lay low upon the furthest sky-line. Behind them might still
be seen the broad estuary of the Gironde, with the high towers of
Saint Andre and Saint Remi shooting up from the plain. In front, amid
radiating lines of poplars, lay the riverside townlet of Cardillac--gray
walls, white houses, and a feather of blue smoke.

�This is the 'Mouton d'Or,'� said Aylward, as they pulled up their
horses at a whitewashed straggling hostel. �What ho there!� he
continued, beating upon the door with the hilt of his sword. �Tapster,
ostler, varlet, hark hither, and a wannion on your lazy limbs! Ha!
Michel, as red in the nose as ever! Three jacks of the wine of the
country, Michel--for the air bites shrewdly. I pray you, Alleyne, to
take note of this door, for I have a tale concerning it.�

�Tell me, friend,� said Alleyne to the portly red-faced inn-keeper, �has
a knight and a squire passed this way within the hour?�

�Nay, sir, it would be two hours back. Was he a small man, weak in the
eyes, with a want of hair, and speaks very quiet when he is most to be
feared?�

�The same,� the squire answered. �But I marvel how you should know how
he speaks when he is in wrath, for he is very gentle-minded with those
who are beneath him.�

�Praise to the saints! it was not I who angered him,� said the fat
Michel.

�Who, then?�

�It was young Sieur de Crespigny of Saintonge, who chanced to be here,
and made game of the Englishman, seeing that he was but a small man and
hath a face which is full of peace. But indeed this good knight was a
very quiet and patient man, for he saw that the Sieur de Crespigny
was still young and spoke from an empty head, so he sat his horse
and quaffed his wine, even as you are doing now, all heedless of the
clacking tongue.�

�And what then, Michel?�

�Well, messieurs, it chanced that the Sieur de Crespigny, having said
this and that, for the laughter of the varlets, cried out at last about
the glove that the knight wore in his coif, asking if it was the custom
in England for a man to wear a great archer's glove in his cap. Pardieu!
I have never seen a man get off his horse as quick as did that stranger
Englishman. Ere the words were past the other's lips he was beside him,
his face nigh touching, and his breath hot upon his cheeks. 'I think,
young sir,' quoth he softly, looking into the other's eyes, 'that now
that I am nearer you will very clearly see that the glove is not an
archer's glove.' 'Perchance not,' said the Sieur de Crespigny with a
twitching lip. 'Nor is it large, but very small,' quoth the Englishman.
'Less large than I had thought,' said the other, looking down, for the
knight's gaze was heavy upon his eyelids. 'And in every way such a glove
as might be worn by the fairest and sweetest lady in England,' quoth
the Englishman. 'It may be so,' said the Sieur de Crespigny, turning his
face from him. 'I am myself weak in the eyes, and have often taken one
thing for another,' quoth the knight, as he sprang back into his saddle
and rode off, leaving the Sieur de Crespigny biting his nails before the
door. Ha! by the five wounds, many men of war have drunk my wine, but
never one was more to my fancy than this little Englishman.�

�By my hilt! he is our master, Michel,� quoth Aylward, �and such men as
we do not serve under a laggart. But here are four deniers, Michel, and
God be with you! En avant, camarades! for we have a long road before
us.�

At a brisk trot the three friends left Cardillac and its wine-house
behind them, riding without a halt past St. Macaire, and on by ferry
over the river Dorpt. At the further side the road winds through La
Reolle, Bazaille, and Marmande, with the sunlit river still gleaming
upon the right, and the bare poplars bristling up upon either side. John
and Alleyne rode silent on either side, but every inn, farm-steading,
or castle brought back to Aylward some remembrance of love, foray, or
plunder, with which to beguile the way.

�There is the smoke from Bazas, on the further side of Garonne,� quoth
he. �There were three sisters yonder, the daughters of a farrier, and,
by these ten finger-bones! a man might ride for a long June day and
never set eyes upon such maidens. There was Marie, tall and grave, and
Blanche petite and gay, and the dark Agnes, with eyes that went through
you like a waxed arrow. I lingered there as long as four days, and was
betrothed to them all; for it seemed shame to set one above her sisters,
and might make ill blood in the family. Yet, for all my care, things
were not merry in the house, and I thought it well to come away. There,
too, is the mill of Le Souris. Old Pierre Le Caron, who owned it, was a
right good comrade, and had ever a seat and a crust for a weary archer.
He was a man who wrought hard at all that he turned his hand to; but he
heated himself in grinding bones to mix with his flour, and so through
over-diligence he brought a fever upon himself and died.�

�Tell me, Aylward,� said Alleyne, �what was amiss with the door of
yonder inn that you should ask me to observe it.�

�Pardieu! yes, I had well-nigh forgot. What saw you on yonder door?�

�I saw a square hole, through which doubtless the host may peep when he
is not too sure of those who knock.�

�And saw you naught else?�

�I marked that beneath this hole there was a deep cut in the door, as
though a great nail had been driven in.�

�And naught else?�

�No.�

�Had you looked more closely you might have seen that there was a stain
upon the wood. The first time that I ever heard my comrade Black Simon
laugh was in front of that door. I heard him once again when he slew a
French squire with his teeth, he being unarmed and the Frenchman having
a dagger.�

�And why did Simon laugh in front of the inn-door!� asked John.

�Simon is a hard and perilous man when he hath the bitter drop in him;
and, by my hilt! he was born for war, for there is little sweetness or
rest in him. This inn, the 'Mouton d'Or,' was kept in the old days by
one Francois Gourval, who had a hard fist and a harder heart. It was
said that many and many an archer coming from the wars had been served
with wine with simples in it, until he slept, and had then been stripped
of all by this Gourval. Then on the morrow, if he made complaint, this
wicked Gourval would throw him out upon the road or beat him, for he
was a very lusty man, and had many stout varlets in his service. This
chanced to come to Simon's ears when we were at Bordeaux together, and
he would have it that we should ride to Cardillac with a good hempen
cord, and give this Gourval such a scourging as he merited. Forth we
rode then, but when we came to the 'Mouton d'Or,' Gourval had had word of
our coming and its purpose, so that the door was barred, nor was there
any way into the house. 'Let us in, good Master Gourval!' cried Simon,
and 'Let us in, good Master Gourval!' cried I, but no word could we get
through the hole in the door, save that he would draw an arrow upon us
unless we went on our way. 'Well, Master Gourval,' quoth Simon at last,
'this is but a sorry welcome, seeing that we have ridden so far just to
shake you by the hand.' 'Canst shake me by the hand without coming in,'
said Gourval. 'And how that?' asked Simon. 'By passing in your hand
through the hole,' said he. 'Nay, my hand is wounded,' quoth Simon, 'and
of such a size that I cannot pass it in.' 'That need not hinder,' said
Gourval, who was hot to be rid of us, 'pass in your left hand.' 'But I
have something for thee, Gourval,' said Simon. 'What then?' he asked.
'There was an English archer who slept here last week of the name of
Hugh of Nutbourne.' 'We have had many rogues here,' said Gourval. 'His
conscience hath been heavy within him because he owes you a debt of
fourteen deniers, having drunk wine for which he hath never paid.
For the easing of his soul, he asked me to pay the money to you as I
passed.' Now this Gourval was very greedy for money, so he thrust forth
his hand for the fourteen deniers, but Simon had his dagger ready and
he pinned his hand to the door. 'I have paid the Englishman's debt,
Gourval!' quoth he, and so rode away, laughing so that he could scarce
sit his horse, leaving mine host still nailed to his door. Such is the
story of the hole which you have marked, and of the smudge upon the
wood. I have heard that from that time English archers have been better
treated in the auberge of Cardillac. But what have we here by the
wayside?�

�It appears to be a very holy man,� said Alleyne.

�And, by the rood! he hath some strange wares,� cried John. �What are
these bits of stone, and of wood, and rusted nails, which are set out in
front of him?�

The man whom they had remarked sat with his back against a cherry-tree,
and his legs shooting out in front of him, like one who is greatly at
his ease. Across his thighs was a wooden board, and scattered over it
all manner of slips of wood and knobs of brick and stone, each laid
separate from the other, as a huckster places his wares. He was dressed
in a long gray gown, and wore a broad hat of the same color, much
weather-stained, with three scallop-shells dangling from the brim. As
they approached, the travellers observed that he was advanced in years,
and that his eyes were upturned and yellow.

�Dear knights and gentlemen,� he cried in a high crackling voice,
�worthy Christian cavaliers, will ye ride past and leave an aged pilgrim
to die of hunger? The sight hast been burned from mine eyes by the sands
of the Holy Land, and I have had neither crust of bread nor cup of wine
these two days past.�

�By my hilt! father,� said Aylward, looking keenly at him, �it is a
marvel to me that thy girdle should have so goodly a span and clip thee
so closely, if you have in sooth had so little to place within it.�

�Kind stranger,� answered the pilgrim, �you have unwittingly spoken
words which are very grievous to me to listen to. Yet I should be loth
to blame you, for I doubt not that what you said was not meant to sadden
me, nor to bring my sore affliction back to my mind. It ill becomes me
to prate too much of what I have endured for the faith, and yet, since
you have observed it, I must tell you that this thickness and roundness
of the waist is caused by a dropsy brought on by over-haste in
journeying from the house of Pilate to the Mount of Olives.�

�There, Aylward,� said Alleyne, with a reddened cheek, �let that curb
your blunt tongue. How could you bring a fresh pang to this holy man,
who hath endured so much and hath journeyed as far as Christ's own
blessed tomb?�

�May the foul fiend strike me dumb!� cried the bowman in hot repentance;
but both the palmer and Alleyne threw up their hands to stop him.

�I forgive thee from my heart, dear brother,� piped the blind man. �But,
oh, these wild words of thine are worse to mine ears than aught which
you could say of me.�

�Not another word shall I speak,� said Aylward; �but here is a franc for
thee and I crave thy blessing.�

�And here is another,� said Alleyne.

�And another,� cried Hordle John.

But the blind palmer would have none of their alms. �Foolish, foolish
pride!� he cried, beating upon his chest with his large brown hand.
�Foolish, foolish pride! How long then will it be ere I can scourge it
forth? Am I then never to conquer it? Oh, strong, strong are the ties of
flesh, and hard it is to subdue the spirit! I come, friends, of a noble
house, and I cannot bring myself to touch this money, even though it be
to save me from the grave.�

�Alas! father,� said Alleyne, �how then can we be of help to thee?�

�I had sat down here to die,� quoth the palmer; �but for many years I
have carried in my wallet these precious things which you see set forth
now before me. It were sin, thought I, that my secret should perish with
me. I shall therefore sell these things to the first worthy passers-by,
and from them I shall have money enough to take me to the shrine of Our
Lady at Rocamadour, where I hope to lay these old bones.�

�What are these treasures, then, father?� asked Hordle John. �I can but
see an old rusty nail, with bits of stone and slips of wood.�

�My friend,� answered the palmer, �not all the money that is in this
country could pay a just price for these wares of mine. This nail,� he
continued, pulling off his hat and turning up his sightless orbs, �is
one of those wherewith man's salvation was secured. I had it, together
with this piece of the true rood, from the five-and-twentieth descendant
of Joseph of Arimathea, who still lives in Jerusalem alive and well,
though latterly much afflicted by boils. Aye, you may well cross
yourselves, and I beg that you will not breathe upon it or touch it with
your fingers.�

�And the wood and stone, holy father?� asked Alleyne, with bated breath,
as he stared awe-struck at his precious relics.

�This cantle of wood is from the true cross, this other from Noah his
ark, and the third is from the door-post of the temple of the wise King
Solomon. This stone was thrown at the sainted Stephen, and the other two
are from the Tower of Babel. Here, too, is part of Aaron's rod, and a
lock of hair from Elisha the prophet.�

�But, father,� quoth Alleyne, �the holy Elisha was bald, which brought
down upon him the revilements of the wicked children.�

�It is very true that he had not much hair,� said the palmer quickly,
�and it is this which makes this relic so exceeding precious. Take now
your choice of these, my worthy gentlemen, and pay such a price as
your consciences will suffer you to offer; for I am not a chapman nor
a huckster, and I would never part with them, did I not know that I am
very near to my reward.�

�Aylward,� said Alleyne excitedly, �this is such a chance as few folk
have twice in one life. The nail I must have, and I will give it to the
abbey of Beaulieu, so that all the folk in England may go thither to
wonder and to pray.�

�And I will have the stone from the temple,� cried Hordle John. �What
would not my old mother give to have it hung over her bed?�

�And I will have Aaron's rod,� quoth Aylward. �I have but five florins
in the world, and here are four of them.�

�Here are three more,� said John.

�And here are five more,� added Alleyne. �Holy father, I hand you twelve
florins, which is all that we can give, though we well know how poor a
pay it is for the wondrous things which you sell us.�

�Down, pride, down!� cried the pilgrim, still beating upon his chest.
�Can I not bend myself then to take this sorry sum which is offered me
for that which has cost me the labors of a life. Give me the dross! Here
are the precious relics, and, oh, I pray you that you will handle them
softly and with reverence, else had I rather left my unworthy bones here
by the wayside.�

With doffed caps and eager hands, the comrades took their new and
precious possessions, and pressed onwards upon their journey, leaving
the aged palmer still seated under the cherry-tree. They rode in
silence, each with his treasure in his hand, glancing at it from time to
time, and scarce able to believe that chance had made them sole owners
of relics of such holiness and worth that every abbey and church
in Christendom would have bid eagerly for their possession. So they
journeyed, full of this good fortune, until opposite the town of Le Mas,
where John's horse cast a shoe, and they were glad to find a wayside
smith who might set the matter to rights. To him Aylward narrated the
good hap which had befallen them; but the smith, when his eyes lit upon
the relics, leaned up against his anvil and laughed, with his hand to
his side, until the tears hopped down his sooty cheeks.

�Why, masters,� quoth he, �this man is a coquillart, or seller of false
relics, and was here in the smithy not two hours ago. This nail that
he hath sold you was taken from my nail-box, and as to the wood and the
stones, you will see a heap of both outside from which he hath filled
his scrip.�

�Nay, nay,� cried Alleyne, �this was a holy man who had journeyed to
Jerusalem, and acquired a dropsy by running from the house of Pilate to
the Mount of Olives.�

�I know not about that,� said the smith; �but I know that a man with a
gray palmer's hat and gown was here no very long time ago, and that he
sat on yonder stump and ate a cold pullet and drank a flask of wine.
Then he begged from me one of my nails, and filling his scrip with
stones, he went upon his way. Look at these nails, and see if they are
not the same as that which he has sold you.�

�Now may God save us!� cried Alleyne, all aghast. �Is there no end then
to the wickedness of humankind? He so humble, so aged, so loth to take
our money--and yet a villain and a cheat. Whom can we trust or believe
in?�

�I will after him,� said Aylward, flinging himself into the saddle.
�Come, Alleyne, we may catch him ere John's horse be shod.�

Away they galloped together, and ere long they saw the old gray palmer
walking slowly along in front of them. He turned, however, at the sound
of their hoofs, and it was clear that his blindness was a cheat like all
the rest of him, for he ran swiftly through a field and so into a wood,
where none could follow him. They hurled their relics after him, and so
rode back to the blacksmith's the poorer both in pocket and in faith.



CHAPTER XXVII. HOW ROGER CLUB-FOOT WAS PASSED INTO PARADISE.


It was evening before the three comrades came into Aiguillon. There they
found Sir Nigel Loring and Ford safely lodged at the sign of the
�Baton Rouge,� where they supped on good fare and slept between
lavender-scented sheets. It chanced, however, that a knight of Poitou,
Sir Gaston d'Estelle, was staying there on his way back from Lithuania,
where he had served a term with the Teutonic knights under the
land-master of the presbytery of Marienberg. He and Sir Nigel sat late
in high converse as to bushments, outfalls, and the intaking of cities,
with many tales of warlike men and valiant deeds. Then their talk turned
to minstrelsy, and the stranger knight drew forth a cittern, upon which
he played the minne-lieder of the north, singing the while in a high
cracked voice of Hildebrand and Brunhild and Siegfried, and all the
strength and beauty of the land of Almain. To this Sir Nigel answered
with the romances of Sir Eglamour, and of Sir Isumbras, and so through
the long winter night they sat by the crackling wood-fire answering each
other's songs until the crowing cocks joined in their concert. Yet, with
scarce an hour of rest, Sir Nigel was as blithe and bright as ever as
they set forth after breakfast upon their way.

�This Sir Gaston is a very worthy man,� said he to his squires as they
rode from the �Baton Rouge.� �He hath a very strong desire to advance
himself, and would have entered upon some small knightly debate with me,
had he not chanced to have his arm-bone broken by the kick of a horse.
I have conceived a great love for him, and I have promised him that when
his bone is mended I will exchange thrusts with him. But we must keep to
this road upon the left.�

�Nay, my fair lord,� quoth Aylward. �The road to Montaubon is over the
river, and so through Quercy and the Agenois.�

�True, my good Aylward; but I have learned from this worthy knight, who
hath come over the French marches, that there is a company of Englishmen
who are burning and plundering in the country round Villefranche. I have
little doubt, from what he says, that they are those whom we seek.�

�By my hilt! it is like enough,� said Aylward. �By all accounts they had
been so long at Montaubon, that there would be little there worth the
taking. Then as they have already been in the south, they would come
north to the country of the Aveyron.�

�We shall follow the Lot until we come to Cahors, and then cross the
marches into Villefranche,� said Sir Nigel. �By St. Paul! as we are but
a small band, it is very likely that we may have some very honorable
and pleasing adventure, for I hear that there is little peace upon the
French border.�

All morning they rode down a broad and winding road, barred with the
shadows of poplars. Sir Nigel rode in front with his squires, while the
two archers followed behind with the sumpter mule between them. They
had left Aiguillon and the Garonne far to the south, and rode now by
the tranquil Lot, which curves blue and placid through a gently rolling
country. Alleyne could not but mark that, whereas in Guienne there had
been many townlets and few castles, there were now many castles and few
houses. On either hand gray walls and square grim keeps peeped out at
every few miles from amid the forests while the few villages which
they passed were all ringed round with rude walls, which spoke of the
constant fear and sudden foray of a wild frontier land. Twice during the
morning there came bands of horsemen swooping down upon them from the
black gateways of wayside strongholds, with short, stern questions as to
whence they came and what their errand. Bands of armed men clanked
along the highway, and the few lines of laden mules which carried the
merchandise of the trader were guarded by armed varlets, or by archers
hired for the service.

�The peace of Bretigny hath not made much change in these parts,�
 quoth Sir Nigel, �for the country is overrun with free companions and
masterless men. Yonder towers, between the wood and the hill, mark the
town of Cahors, and beyond it is the land of France. But here is a man
by the wayside, and as he hath two horses and a squire I make little
doubt that he is a knight. I pray you, Alleyne, to give him greeting
from me, and to ask him for his titles and coat-armor. It may be that I
can relieve him of some vow, or perchance he hath a lady whom he would
wish to advance.�

�Nay, my fair lord,� said Alleyne, �these are not horses and a squire,
but mules and a varlet. The man is a mercer, for he hath a great bundle
beside him.�

�Now, God's blessing on your honest English voice!� cried the stranger,
pricking up his ears at the sound of Alleyne's words. �Never have I
heard music that was so sweet to mine ear. Come, Watkin lad, throw the
bales over Laura's back! My heart was nigh broke, for it seemed that I
had left all that was English behind me, and that I would never set eyes
upon Norwich market square again.� He was a tall, lusty, middle-aged
man with a ruddy face, a brown forked beard shot with gray, and a
broad Flanders hat set at the back of his head. His servant, as tall as
himself, but gaunt and raw-boned, had swung the bales on the back of
one mule, while the merchant mounted upon the other and rode to join
the party. It was easy to see, as he approached, from the quality of
his dress and the richness of his trappings, that he was a man of some
wealth and position.

�Sir knight,� said he, �my name is David Micheldene, and I am a burgher
and alderman of the good town of Norwich, where I live five doors from
the church of Our Lady, as all men know on the banks of Yare. I have
here my bales of cloth which I carry to Cahors--woe worth the day that
ever I started on such an errand! I crave your gracious protection upon
the way for me, my servant, and my mercery; for I have already had
many perilous passages, and have now learned that Roger Club-foot, the
robber-knight of Quercy, is out upon the road in front of me. I hereby
agree to give you one rose-noble if you bring me safe to the inn of the
'Angel' in Cahors, the same to be repaid to me or my heirs if any harm
come to me or my goods.�

�By Saint Paul!� answered Sir Nigel, �I should be a sorry knight if I
ask pay for standing by a countryman in a strange land. You may ride
with me and welcome, Master Micheldene, and your varlet may follow with
my archers.�

�God's benison upon thy bounty!� cried the stranger. �Should you come to
Norwich you may have cause to remember that you have been of service to
Alderman Micheldene. It is not very far to Cahors, for surely I see the
cathedral towers against the sky-line; but I have heard much of this
Roger Clubfoot, and the more I hear the less do I wish to look upon his
face. Oh, but I am sick and weary of it all, and I would give half that
I am worth to see my good dame sitting in peace beside me, and to hear
the bells of Norwich town.�

�Your words are strange to me,� quoth Sir Nigel, �for you have the
appearance of a stout man, and I see that you wear a sword by your
side.�

�Yet it is not my trade,� answered the merchant. �I doubt not that if
I set you down in my shop at Norwich you might scarce tell fustian from
falding, and know little difference between the velvet of Genoa and the
three-piled cloth of Bruges. There you might well turn to me for help.
But here on a lone roadside, with thick woods and robber-knights, I turn
to you, for it is the business to which you have been reared.�

�There is sooth in what you say, Master Micheldene,� said Sir Nigel,
�and I trust that we may come upon this Roger Clubfoot, for I have heard
that he is a very stout and skilful soldier, and a man from whom much
honor is to be gained.�

�He is a bloody robber,� said the trader, curtly, �and I wish I saw him
kicking at the end of a halter.�

�It is such men as he,� Sir Nigel remarked, �who give the true knight
honorable deeds to do, whereby he may advance himself.�

�It is such men as he,� retorted Micheldene, �who are like rats in
a wheat-rick or moths in a woolfels, a harm and a hindrance to all
peaceful and honest men.�

�Yet, if the dangers of the road weigh so heavily upon you, master
alderman, it is a great marvel to me that you should venture so far from
home.�

�And sometimes, sir knight, it is a marvel to myself. But I am a man who
may grutch and grumble, but when I have set my face to do a thing I
will not turn my back upon it until it be done. There is one, Francois
Villet, at Cahors, who will send me wine-casks for my cloth-bales, so to
Cahors I will go, though all the robber-knights of Christendom were to
line the roads like yonder poplars.�

�Stoutly spoken, master alderman! But how have you fared hitherto?�

�As a lamb fares in a land of wolves. Five times we have had to beg and
pray ere we could pass. Twice I have paid toll to the wardens of the
road. Three times we have had to draw, and once at La Reolle we stood
over our wool-bales, Watkin and I, and we laid about us for as long as a
man might chant a litany, slaying one rogue and wounding two others. By
God's coif! we are men of peace, but we are free English burghers, not
to be mishandled either in our country or abroad. Neither lord, baron,
knight, or commoner shall have as much as a strike of flax of mine
whilst I have strength to wag this sword.�

�And a passing strange sword it is,� quoth Sir Nigel. �What make you,
Alleyne, of these black lines which are drawn across the sheath?�

�I cannot tell what they are, my fair lord.�

�Nor can I,� said Ford.

The merchant chuckled to himself. �It was a thought of mine own,�
 said he; �for the sword was made by Thomas Wilson, the armorer, who is
betrothed to my second daughter Margery. Know then that the sheath is
one cloth-yard, in length, marked off according to feet and inches to
serve me as a measuring wand. It is also of the exact weight of two
pounds, so that I may use it in the balance.�

�By Saint Paul!� quoth Sir Nigel, �it is very clear to me that the sword
is like thyself, good alderman, apt either for war or for peace. But
I doubt not that even in England you have had much to suffer from the
hands of robbers and outlaws.�

�It was only last Lammastide, sir knight, that I was left for dead near
Reading as I journeyed to Winchester fair. Yet I had the rogues up at
the court of pie-powder, and they will harm no more peaceful traders.�

�You travel much then!�

�To Winchester, Linn mart, Bristol fair, Stourbridge, and Bartholomew's
in London Town. The rest of the year you may ever find me five doors
from the church of Our Lady, where I would from my heart that I was at
this moment, for there is no air like Norwich air, and no water like the
Yare, nor can all the wines of France compare with the beer of old Sam
Yelverton who keeps the 'Dun Cow.' But, out and alack, here is an evil
fruit which hangs upon this chestnut-tree!�

As he spoke they had ridden round a curve of the road and come upon a
great tree which shot one strong brown branch across their path. From
the centre of this branch there hung a man, with his head at a horrid
slant to his body and his toes just touching the ground. He was naked
save for a linen under shirt and pair of woollen drawers. Beside him
on a green bank there sat a small man with a solemn face, and a great
bundle of papers of all colors thrusting forth from the scrip which lay
beside him. He was very richly dressed, with furred robes, a scarlet
hood, and wide hanging sleeves lined with flame-colored silk. A great
gold chain hung round his neck, and rings glittered from every finger of
his hands. On his lap he had a little pile of gold and of silver, which
he was dropping, coin by coin, into a plump pouch which hung from his
girdle.

�May the saints be with you, good travellers!� he shouted, as the
party rode up. �May the four Evangelists watch over you! May the twelve
Apostles bear you up! May the blessed army of martyrs direct your feet
and lead you to eternal bliss!�

�Gramercy for these good wishes!� said Sir Nigel. �But I perceive,
master alderman, that this man who hangs here is, by mark of foot, the
very robber-knight of whom we have spoken. But there is a cartel pinned
upon his breast, and I pray you, Alleyne, to read it to me.�

The dead robber swung slowly to and fro in the wintry wind, a fixed
smile upon his swarthy face, and his bulging eyes still glaring down the
highway of which he had so long been the terror; on a sheet of parchment
upon his breast was printed in rude characters;

                    ROGER PIED-BOT.

              Par l'ordre du Senechal de
              Castelnau, et de l'Echevin de
              Cahors, servantes fideles du
              tres vaillant et tres puissant
              Edouard, Prince de Galles et
              d'Aquitaine.
              Ne touchez pas,
              Ne coutez pas,
              Ne depechez pas.

�He took a sorry time in dying,� said the man who sat beside him. �He
could stretch one toe to the ground and bear himself up, so that I
thought he would never have done. Now at last, however, he is safely in
paradise, and so I may jog on upon my earthly way.� He mounted, as he
spoke, a white mule which had been grazing by the wayside, all gay
with fustian of gold and silver bells, and rode onward with Sir Nigel's
party.

�How know you then that he is in paradise?� asked Sir Nigel. �All things
are possible to God, but, certes, without a miracle, I should scarce
expect to find the soul of Roger Clubfoot amongst the just.�

�I know that he is there because I have just passed him in there,�
 answered the stranger, rubbing his bejewelled hands together in placid
satisfaction. �It is my holy mission to be a sompnour or pardoner. I am
the unworthy servant and delegate of him who holds the keys. A contrite
heart and ten nobles to holy mother Church may stave off perdition; but
he hath a pardon of the first degree, with a twenty-five livre benison,
so that I doubt if he will so much as feel a twinge of purgatory. I came
up even as the seneschal's archers were tying him up, and I gave him my
fore-word that I would bide with him until he had passed. There were two
leaden crowns among the silver, but I would not for that stand in the
way of his salvation.�

�By Saint Paul!� said Sir Nigel, �if you have indeed this power to open
and to shut the gates of hope, then indeed you stand high above mankind.
But if you do but claim to have it, and yet have it not, then it seems
to me, master clerk, that you may yourself find the gate barred when you
shall ask admittance.�

�Small of faith! Small of faith!� cried the sompnour. �Ah, Sir Didymus
yet walks upon earth! And yet no words of doubt can bring anger to mine
heart, or a bitter word to my lip, for am I not a poor unworthy worker
in the cause of gentleness and peace? Of all these pardons which I bear
every one is stamped and signed by our holy father, the prop and centre
of Christendom.�

�Which of them?� asked Sir Nigel.

�Ha, ha!� cried the pardoner, shaking a jewelled forefinger. �Thou
wouldst be deep in the secrets of mother Church? Know then that I have
both in my scrip. Those who hold with Urban shall have Urban's pardon,
while I have Clement's for the Clementist--or he who is in doubt may
have both, so that come what may he shall be secure. I pray you that you
will buy one, for war is bloody work, and the end is sudden with little
time for thought or shrift. Or you, sir, for you seem to me to be a man
who would do ill to trust to your own merits.� This to the alderman of
Norwich, who had listened to him with a frowning brow and a sneering
lip.

�When I sell my cloth,� quoth he, �he who buys may weigh and feel and
handle. These goods which you sell are not to be seen, nor is there
any proof that you hold them. Certes, if mortal man might control God's
mercy, it would be one of a lofty and God-like life, and not one who is
decked out with rings and chains and silks, like a pleasure-wench at a
kermesse.

�Thou wicked and shameless man!� cried the clerk. �Dost thou dare to
raise thy voice against the unworthy servant of mother Church?�

�Unworthy enough!� quoth David Micheldene. �I would have you to know,
clerk, that I am a free English burgher, and that I dare say my mind to
our father the Pope himself, let alone such a lacquey's lacquey as you!�

�Base-born and foul-mouthed knave!� cried the sompnour. �You prate of
holy things, to which your hog's mind can never rise. Keep silence, lest
I call a curse upon you!�

�Silence yourself!� roared the other. �Foul bird! we found thee by the
gallows like a carrion-crow. A fine life thou hast of it with thy silks
and thy baubles, cozening the last few shillings from the pouches of
dying men. A fig for thy curse! Bide here, if you will take my rede, for
we will make England too hot for such as you, when Master Wicliff has
the ordering of it. Thou vile thief! it is you, and such as you, who
bring an evil name upon the many churchmen who lead a pure and a holy
life. Thou outside the door of heaven! Art more like to be inside the
door of hell.�

At this crowning insult the sompnour, with a face ashen with rage,
raised up a quivering hand and began pouring Latin imprecations upon
the angry alderman. The latter, however, was not a man to be quelled by
words, for he caught up his ell-measure sword-sheath and belabored the
cursing clerk with it. The latter, unable to escape from the shower
of blows, set spurs to his mule and rode for his life, with his enemy
thundering behind him. At sight of his master's sudden departure, the
varlet Watkin set off after him, with the pack-mule beside him, so that
the four clattered away down the road together, until they swept round
a curve and their babble was but a drone in the distance. Sir Nigel
and Alleyne gazed in astonishment at one another, while Ford burst out
a-laughing.

�Pardieu!� said the knight, �this David Micheldene must be one of those
Lollards about whom Father Christopher of the priory had so much to say.
Yet he seemed to be no bad man from what I have seen of him.�

�I have heard that Wicliff hath many followers in Norwich,� answered
Alleyne.

�By St. Paul! I have no great love for them,� quoth Sir Nigel. �I am a
man who am slow to change; and, if you take away from me the faith that
I have been taught, it would be long ere I could learn one to set in its
place. It is but a chip here and a chip there, yet it may bring the tree
down in time. Yet, on the other hand, I cannot but think it shame that a
man should turn God's mercy on and off, as a cellarman doth wine with a
spigot.�

�Nor is it,� said Alleyne, �part of the teachings of that mother Church
of which he had so much to say. There was sooth in what the alderman
said of it.�

�Then, by St. Paul! they may settle it betwixt them,� quoth Sir Nigel.
�For me, I serve God, the king and my lady; and so long as I can keep
the path of honor I am well content. My creed shall ever be that of
Chandos:

        �Fais ce que dois--adviegne que peut,
         C'est commande au chevalier.�



CHAPTER XXVIII. HOW THE COMRADES CAME OVER THE MARCHES OF FRANCE


After passing Cahors, the party branched away from the main road, and
leaving the river to the north of them, followed a smaller track which
wound over a vast and desolate plain. This path led them amid marshes
and woods, until it brought them out into a glade with a broad stream
swirling swiftly down the centre of it. Through this the horses splashed
their way, and on the farther shore Sir Nigel announced to them that
they were now within the borders of the land of France. For some miles
they still followed the same lonely track, which led them through
a dense wood, and then widening out, curved down to an open rolling
country, such as they had traversed between Aiguillon and Cahors.

If it were grim and desolate upon the English border, however, what
can describe the hideous barrenness of this ten times harried tract
of France? The whole face of the country was scarred and disfigured,
mottled over with the black blotches of burned farm-steadings, and
the gray, gaunt gable-ends of what had been chateaux. Broken fences,
crumbling walls, vineyards littered with stones, the shattered arches of
bridges--look where you might, the signs of ruin and rapine met the eye.
Here and there only, on the farthest sky-line, the gnarled turrets of a
castle, or the graceful pinnacles of church or of monastery showed where
the forces of the sword or of the spirit had preserved some small islet
of security in this universal flood of misery. Moodily and in silence
the little party rode along the narrow and irregular track, their hearts
weighed down by this far-stretching land of despair. It was indeed
a stricken and a blighted country, and a man might have ridden from
Auvergne in the north to the marches of Foix, nor ever seen a smiling
village or a thriving homestead.

From time to time as they advanced they saw strange lean figures
scraping and scratching amid the weeds and thistles, who, on sight
of the band of horsemen, threw up their arms and dived in among the
brushwood, as shy and as swift as wild animals. More than once, however,
they came on families by the wayside, who were too weak from hunger and
disease to fly, so that they could but sit like hares on a tussock, with
panting chests and terror in their eyes. So gaunt were these poor folk,
so worn and spent--with bent and knotted frames, and sullen, hopeless,
mutinous faces--that it made the young Englishman heart-sick to look
upon them. Indeed, it seemed as though all hope and light had gone so
far from them that it was not to be brought back; for when Sir Nigel
threw down a handful of silver among them there came no softening of
their lined faces, but they clutched greedily at the coins, peering
questioningly at him, and champing with their animal jaws. Here and
there amid the brushwood the travellers saw the rude bundle of
sticks which served them as a home--more like a fowl's nest than the
dwelling-place of man. Yet why should they build and strive, when the
first adventurer who passed would set torch to their thatch, and when
their own feudal lord would wring from them with blows and curses the
last fruits of their toil? They sat at the lowest depth of human misery,
and hugged a bitter comfort to their souls as they realized that they
could go no lower. Yet they had still the human gift of speech, and
would take council among themselves in their brushwood hovels, glaring
with bleared eyes and pointing with thin fingers at the great widespread
chateaux which ate like a cancer into the life of the country-side. When
such men, who are beyond hope and fear, begin in their dim minds to see
the source of their woes, it may be an evil time for those who have wronged
them. The weak man becomes strong when he has nothing, for then only can
he feel the wild, mad thrill of despair. High and strong the chateaux,
lowly and weak the brushwood hut; but God help the seigneur and his lady
when the men of the brushwood set their hands to the work of revenge!

Through such country did the party ride for eight or it might be nine
miles, until the sun began to slope down in the west and their shadows
to stream down the road in front of them. Wary and careful they must
be, with watchful eyes to the right and the left, for this was no man's
land, and their only passports were those which hung from their belts.
Frenchmen and Englishmen, Gascon and Provencal, Brabanter, Tardvenu,
Scorcher, Flayer, and Free Companion, wandered and struggled over the
whole of this accursed district. So bare and cheerless was the outlook,
and so few and poor the dwellings, that Sir Nigel began to have fears as
to whether he might find food and quarters for his little troop. It was
a relief to him, therefore, when their narrow track opened out upon a
larger road, and they saw some little way down it a square white house
with a great bunch of holly hung out at the end of a stick from one of
the upper windows.

�By St. Paul!� said he, �I am right glad; for I had feared that we might
have neither provant nor herbergage. Ride on, Alleyne, and tell this
inn-keeper that an English knight with his party will lodge with him
this night.�

Alleyne set spurs to his horse and reached the inn door a long bow-shot
before his companions. Neither varlet nor ostler could be seen, so he
pushed open the door and called loudly for the landlord. Three times he
shouted, but, receiving no reply, he opened an inner door and advanced
into the chief guest-room of the hostel.

A very cheerful wood-fire was sputtering and cracking in an open grate
at the further end of the apartment. At one side of this fire, in a
high-backed oak chair, sat a lady, her face turned towards the door.
The firelight played over her features, and Alleyne thought that he had
never seen such queenly power, such dignity and strength, upon a woman's
face. She might have been five-and-thirty years of age, with aquiline
nose, firm yet sensitive mouth, dark curving brows, and deep-set eyes
which shone and sparkled with a shifting brilliancy. Beautiful as she
was, it was not her beauty which impressed itself upon the beholder;
it was her strength, her power, the sense of wisdom which hung over
the broad white brow, the decision which lay in the square jaw and
delicately moulded chin. A chaplet of pearls sparkled amid her black
hair, with a gauze of silver network flowing back from it over her
shoulders; a black mantle was swathed round her, and she leaned back in
her chair as one who is fresh from a journey.

In the opposite corner there sat a very burly and broad-shouldered man,
clad in a black jerkin trimmed with sable, with a black velvet cap with
curling white feather cocked upon the side of his head. A flask of red
wine stood at his elbow, and he seemed to be very much at his ease, for
his feet were stuck up on a stool, and between his thighs he held a dish
full of nuts. These he cracked between his strong white teeth and chewed
in a leisurely way, casting the shells into the blaze. As Alleyne gazed
in at him he turned his face half round and cocked an eye at him over
his shoulder. It seemed to the young Englishman that he had never seen
so hideous a face, for the eyes were of the lightest green, the nose was
broken and driven inwards, while the whole countenance was seared and
puckered with wounds. The voice, too, when he spoke, was as deep and as
fierce as the growl of a beast of prey.

�Young man,� said he, �I know not who you may be, and I am not much
inclined to bestir myself, but if it were not that I am bent upon taking
my ease, I swear, by the sword of Joshua! that I would lay my dog-whip
across your shoulders for daring to fill the air with these discordant
bellowings.�

Taken aback at this ungentle speech, and scarce knowing how to answer it
fitly in the presence of the lady, Alleyne stood with his hand upon the
handle of the door, while Sir Nigel and his companions dismounted. At
the sound of these fresh voices, and of the tongue in which they spoke,
the stranger crashed his dish of nuts down upon the floor, and began
himself to call for the landlord until the whole house re-echoed with
his roarings. With an ashen face the white-aproned host came running
at his call, his hands shaking and his very hair bristling with
apprehension. �For the sake of God, sirs,� he whispered as he passed,
�speak him fair and do not rouse him! For the love of the Virgin, be
mild with him!�

�Who is this, then?� asked Sir Nigel.

Alleyne was about to explain, when a fresh roar from the stranger
interrupted him.

�Thou villain inn-keeper,� he shouted, �did I not ask you when I brought
my lady here whether your inn was clean?�

�You did, sire.�

�Did I not very particularly ask you whether there were any vermin in
it?�

�You did, sire.�

�And you answered me?�

�That there were not, sire.�

�And yet ere I have been here an hour I find Englishmen crawling about
within it. Where are we to be free from this pestilent race? Can a
Frenchman upon French land not sit down in a French auberge without
having his ears pained by the clack of their hideous talk? Send them
packing, inn-keeper, or it may be the worse for them and for you.�

�I will, sire, I will!� cried the frightened host, and bustled from
the room, while the soft, soothing voice of the woman was heard
remonstrating with her furious companion.

�Indeed, gentlemen, you had best go,� said mine host. �It is but six
miles to Villefranche, where there are very good quarters at the sign of
the 'Lion Rouge.'�

�Nay,� answered Sir Nigel, �I cannot go until I have seen more of this
person, for he appears to be a man from whom much is to be hoped. What
is his name and title?�

�It is not for my lips to name it unless by his desire. But I beg and
pray you, gentlemen, that you will go from my house, for I know not what
may come of it if his rage should gain the mastery of him.�

�By Saint Paul!� lisped Sir Nigel, �this is certainly a man whom it
is worth journeying far to know. Go tell him that a humble knight of
England would make his further honorable acquaintance, not from any
presumption, pride, or ill-will, but for the advancement of chivalry and
the glory of our ladies. Give him greeting from Sir Nigel Loring, and
say that the glove which I bear in my cap belongs to the most peerless
and lovely of her sex, whom I am now ready to uphold against any lady
whose claim he might be desirous of advancing.�

The landlord was hesitating whether to carry this message or no, when
the door of the inner room was flung open, and the stranger bounded out
like a panther from its den, his hair bristling and his deformed face
convulsed with anger.

�Still here!� he snarled. �Dogs of England, must ye be lashed hence?
Tiphaine, my sword!� He turned to seize his weapon, but as he did so his
gaze fell upon the blazonry of sir Nigel's shield, and he stood staring,
while the fire in his strange green eyes softened into a sly and
humorous twinkle.

�Mort Dieu!� cried he, �it is my little swordsman of Bordeaux. I should
remember that coat-armor, seeing that it is but three days since I
looked upon it in the lists by Garonne. Ah! Sir Nigel, Sir Nigel! you
owe me a return for this,� and he touched his right arm, which was girt
round just under the shoulder with a silken kerchief.

But the surprise of the stranger at the sight of Sir Nigel was as
nothing compared with the astonishment and the delight which shone upon
the face of the knight of Hampshire as he looked upon the strange face
of the Frenchman. Twice he opened his mouth and twice he peered again,
as though to assure himself that his eyes had not played him a trick.

�Bertrand!� he gasped at last. �Bertrand du Guesclin!�

�By Saint Ives!� shouted the French soldier, with a hoarse roar of
laughter, �it is well that I should ride with my vizor down, for he that
has once seen my face does not need to be told my name. It is indeed I,
Sir Nigel, and here is my hand! I give you my word that there are but
three Englishmen in this world whom I would touch save with the sharp
edge of the sword: the prince is one, Chandos the second, and you the
third; for I have heard much that is good of you.�

�I am growing aged, and am somewhat spent in the wars,� quoth Sir Nigel;
�but I can lay by my sword now with an easy mind, for I can say that
I have crossed swords with him who hath the bravest heart and the
strongest arm of all this great kingdom of France. I have longed for it,
I have dreamed of it, and now I can scarce bring my mind to understand
that this great honor hath indeed been mine.�

�By the Virgin of Rennes! you have given me cause to be very certain of
it,� said Du Guesclin, with a gleam of his broad white teeth.

�And perhaps, most honored sir, it would please you to continue the
debate. Perhaps you would condescend to go farther into the matter.
God He knows that I am unworthy of such honor, yet I can show my
four-and-sixty quarterings, and I have been present at some bickerings
and scufflings during these twenty years.�

�Your fame is very well known to me, and I shall ask my lady to enter
your name upon my tablets,� said Sir Bertrand. �There are many who wish
to advance themselves, and who bide their turn, for I refuse no man who
comes on such an errand. At present it may not be, for mine arm is stiff
from this small touch, and I would fain do you full honor when we cross
swords again. Come in with me, and let your squires come also, that my
sweet spouse, the Lady Tiphaine, may say that she hath seen so famed and
gentle a knight.�

Into the chamber they went in all peace and concord, where the Lady
Tiphaine sat like queen on throne for each in turn to be presented to
her. Sooth to say, the stout heart of Sir Nigel, which cared little for
the wrath of her lion-like spouse, was somewhat shaken by the calm, cold
face of this stately dame, for twenty years of camp-life had left him
more at ease in the lists than in a lady's boudoir. He bethought him,
too, as he looked at her set lips and deep-set questioning eyes, that he
had heard strange tales of this same Lady Tiphaine du Guesclin. Was
it not she who was said to lay hands upon the sick and raise them from
their couches when the leeches had spent their last nostrums? Had she
not forecast the future, and were there not times when in the loneliness
of her chamber she was heard to hold converse with some being upon whom
mortal eye never rested--some dark familiar who passed where doors were
barred and windows high? Sir Nigel sunk his eye and marked a cross on
the side of his leg as he greeted this dangerous dame, and yet ere
five minutes had passed he was hers, and not he only but his two young
squires as well. The mind had gone out of them, and they could but look
at this woman and listen to the words which fell from her lips--words
which thrilled through their nerves and stirred their souls like the
battle-call of a bugle.

Often in peaceful after-days was Alleyne to think of that scene of the
wayside inn of Auvergne. The shadows of evening had fallen, and the
corners of the long, low, wood-panelled room were draped in darkness.
The sputtering wood fire threw out a circle of red flickering light
which played over the little group of wayfarers, and showed up every
line and shadow upon their faces. Sir Nigel sat with elbows upon knees,
and chin upon hands, his patch still covering one eye, but his other
shining like a star, while the ruddy light gleamed upon his smooth white
head. Ford was seated at his left, his lips parted, his eyes staring,
and a fleck of deep color on either cheek, his limbs all rigid as one
who fears to move. On the other side the famous French captain leaned
back in his chair, a litter of nut-shells upon his lap, his huge head
half buried in a cushion, while his eyes wandered with an amused gleam
from his dame to the staring, enraptured Englishmen. Then, last of
all, that pale clear-cut face, that sweet clear voice, with its high
thrilling talk of the deathlessness of glory, of the worthlessness of
life, of the pain of ignoble joys, and of the joy which lies in all
pains which lead to a noble end. Still, as the shadows deepened, she
spoke of valor and virtue, of loyalty, honor, and fame, and still they
sat drinking in her words while the fire burned down and the red ash
turned to gray.

�By the sainted Ives!� cried Du Guesclin at last, �it is time that we
spoke of what we are to do this night, for I cannot think that in this
wayside auberge there are fit quarters for an honorable company.�

Sir Nigel gave a long sigh as he came back from the dreams of chivalry
and hardihood into which this strange woman's words had wafted him. �I
care not where I sleep,� said he; �but these are indeed somewhat rude
lodgings for this fair lady.�

�What contents my lord contents me,� quoth she. �I perceive, Sir Nigel,
that you are under vow,� she added, glancing at his covered eye.

�It is my purpose to attempt some small deed,� he answered.

�And the glove--is it your lady's?�

�It is indeed my sweet wife's.�

�Who is doubtless proud of you.�

�Say rather I of her,� quoth he quickly. �God He knows that I am not
worthy to be her humble servant. It is easy, lady, for a man to ride
forth in the light of day, and do his devoir when all men have eyes for
him. But in a woman's heart there is a strength and truth which asks no
praise, and can but be known to him whose treasure it is.�

The Lady Tiphaine smiled across at her husband. �You have often told
me, Bertrand, that there were very gentle knights amongst the English,�
 quoth she.

�Aye, aye,� said he moodily. �But to horse, Sir Nigel, you and yours
and we shall seek the chateau of Sir Tristram de Rochefort, which is
two miles on this side of Villefranche. He is Seneschal of Auvergne, and
mine old war companion.�

�Certes, he would have a welcome for you,� quoth Sir Nigel; �but indeed
he might look askance at one who comes without permit over the marches.�

�By the Virgin! when he learns that you have come to draw away these
rascals he will be very blithe to look upon your face. Inn-keeper, here
are ten gold pieces. What is over and above your reckoning you may take
off from your charges to the next needy knight who comes this way. Come
then, for it grows late and the horses are stamping in the roadway.�

The Lady Tiphaine and her spouse sprang upon their steeds without
setting feet to stirrup, and away they jingled down the white moonlit
highway, with Sir Nigel at the lady's bridle-arm, and Ford a spear's
length behind them. Alleyne had lingered for an instant in the passage,
and as he did so there came a wild outcry from a chamber upon the
left, and out there ran Aylward and John, laughing together like two
schoolboys who are bent upon a prank. At sight of Alleyne they slunk
past him with somewhat of a shame-faced air, and springing upon their
horses galloped after their party. The hubbub within the chamber did not
cease, however, but rather increased, with yells of: �A moi, mes amis! A
moi, camarades! A moi, l'honorable champion de l'Eveque de Montaubon! A
la recousse de l'eglise sainte!� So shrill was the outcry that both the
inn-keeper and Alleyne, with every varlet within hearing, rushed wildly
to the scene of the uproar.

It was indeed a singular scene which met their eyes. The room was a long
and lofty one, stone floored and bare, with a fire at the further end
upon which a great pot was boiling. A deal table ran down the centre,
with a wooden wine-pitcher upon it and two horn cups. Some way from it
was a smaller table with a single beaker and a broken wine-bottle. From
the heavy wooden rafters which formed the roof there hung rows of hooks
which held up sides of bacon, joints of smoked beef, and strings of
onions for winter use. In the very centre of all these, upon the
largest hook of all, there hung a fat little red-faced man with enormous
whiskers, kicking madly in the air and clawing at rafters, hams, and
all else that was within hand-grasp. The huge steel hook had been passed
through the collar of his leather jerkin, and there he hung like a fish
on a line, writhing, twisting, and screaming, but utterly unable to free
himself from his extraordinary position. It was not until Alleyne and
the landlord had mounted on the table that they were able to lift him
down, when he sank gasping with rage into a seat, and rolled his eyes
round in every direction.

�Has he gone?� quoth he.

�Gone? Who?�

�He, the man with the red head, the giant man.�

�Yes,� said Alleyne, �he hath gone.�

�And comes not back?�

�No.�

�The better for him!� cried the little man, with a long sigh of relief.
�Mon Dieu! What! am I not the champion of the Bishop of Montaubon? Ah,
could I have descended, could I have come down, ere he fled! Then you
would have seen. You would have beheld a spectacle then. There would
have been one rascal the less upon earth. Ma foi, yes!�

�Good master Pelligny,� said the landlord, �these gentlemen have not
gone very fast, and I have a horse in the stable at your disposal, for
I would rather have such bloody doings as you threaten outside the four
walls of mine auberge.�

�I hurt my leg and cannot ride,� quoth the bishop's champion. �I
strained a sinew on the day that I slew the three men at Castelnau.�

�God save you, master Pelligny!� cried the landlord. �It must be an
awesome thing to have so much blood upon one's soul. And yet I do not
wish to see so valiant a man mishandled, and so I will, for friendship's
sake, ride after this Englishman and bring him back to you.�

�You shall not stir,� cried the champion, seizing the inn-keeper in a
convulsive grasp. �I have a love for you, Gaston, and I would not
bring your house into ill repute, nor do such scath to these walls and
chattels as must befall if two such men as this Englishman and I fall to
work here.�

�Nay, think not of me!� cried the inn-keeper. �What are my walls when
set against the honor of Francois Poursuivant d'Amour Pelligny, champion
of the Bishop of Montaubon. My horse, Andre!�

�By the saints, no! Gaston, I will not have it! You have said truly that
it is an awesome thing to have such rough work upon one's soul. I am
but a rude soldier, yet I have a mind. Mon Dieu! I reflect, I weigh, I
balance. Shall I not meet this man again? Shall I not bear him in mind?
Shall I not know him by his great paws and his red head? Ma foi, yes!�

�And may I ask, sir,� said Alleyne, �why it is that you call yourself
champion of the Bishop of Montaubon?�

�You may ask aught which it is becoming to me to answer. The bishop hath
need of a champion, because, if any cause be set to test of combat, it
would scarce become his office to go down into the lists with leather
and shield and cudgel to exchange blows with any varlet. He looks around
him then for some tried fighting man, some honest smiter who can give a
blow or take one. It is not for me to say how far he hath succeeded, but
it is sooth that he who thinks that he hath but to do with the Bishop of
Montaubon, finds himself face to face with Francois Poursuivant d'Amour
Pelligny.�

At this moment there was a clatter of hoofs upon the road, and a varlet
by the door cried out that one of the Englishmen was coming back.
The champion looked wildly about for some corner of safety, and was
clambering up towards the window, when Ford's voice sounded from
without, calling upon Alleyne to hasten, or he might scarce find his
way. Bidding adieu to landlord and to champion, therefore, he set off at
a gallop, and soon overtook the two archers.

�A pretty thing this, John,� said he. �Thou wilt have holy Church upon
you if you hang her champions upon iron hooks in an inn kitchen.�

�It was done without thinking,� he answered apologetically, while
Aylward burst into a shout of laughter.

�By my hilt! mon petit,� said he, �you would have laughed also could
you have seen it. For this man was so swollen with pride that he would
neither drink with us, nor sit at the same table with us, nor as much as
answer a question, but must needs talk to the varlet all the time that
it was well there was peace, and that he had slain more Englishmen than
there were tags to his doublet. Our good old John could scarce lay his
tongue to French enough to answer him, so he must needs reach out his
great hand to him and place him very gently where you saw him. But we
must on, for I can scarce hear their hoofs upon the road.�

�I think that I can see them yet,� said Ford, peering down the moonlit
road.

�Pardieu! yes. Now they ride forth from the shadow. And yonder dark
clump is the Castle of Villefranche. En avant camarades! or Sir Nigel
may reach the gates before us. But hark, mes amis, what sound is that?�

As he spoke the hoarse blast of a horn was heard from some woods upon
the right. An answering call rung forth upon their left, and hard upon
it two others from behind them.

�They are the horns of swine-herds,� quoth Aylward. �Though why they
blow them so late I cannot tell.�

�Let us on, then,� said Ford, and the whole party, setting their spurs
to their horses, soon found themselves at the Castle of Villefranche,
where the drawbridge had already been lowered and the portcullis raised
in response to the summons of Du Guesclin.



CHAPTER XXIX. HOW THE BLESSED HOUR OF SIGHT CAME TO THE LADY TIPHAINE.


Sir Tristram de Rochefort, Seneschal of Auvergne and Lord of
Villefranche, was a fierce and renowned soldier who had grown gray in
the English wars. As lord of the marches and guardian of an exposed
country-side, there was little rest for him even in times of so-called
peace, and his whole life was spent in raids and outfalls upon the
Brabanters, late-comers, flayers, free companions, and roving archers
who wandered over his province. At times he would come back in triumph,
and a dozen corpses swinging from the summit of his keep would warn
evil-doers that there was still a law in the land. At others his
ventures were not so happy, and he and his troop would spur it over
the drawbridge with clatter of hoofs hard at their heels and whistle of
arrows about their ears. Hard he was of hand and harder of heart, hated
by his foes, and yet not loved by those whom he protected, for twice he
had been taken prisoner, and twice his ransom had been wrung by dint
of blows and tortures out of the starving peasants and ruined farmers.
Wolves or watch-dogs, it was hard to say from which the sheep had most
to fear.

The Castle of Villefranche was harsh and stern as its master. A broad
moat, a high outer wall turreted at the corners, with a great black keep
towering above all--so it lay before them in the moonlight. By the light
of two flambeaux, protruded through the narrow slit-shaped openings at
either side of the ponderous gate, they caught a glimpse of the glitter
of fierce eyes and of the gleam of the weapons of the guard. The sight
of the two-headed eagle of Du Guesclin, however, was a passport into
any fortalice in France, and ere they had passed the gate the old border
knight came running forwards with hands out-thrown to greet his famous
countryman. Nor was he less glad to see Sir Nigel, when the Englishman's
errand was explained to him, for these archers had been a sore thorn in
his side and had routed two expeditions which he had sent against them.
A happy day it would be for the Seneschal of Auvergne when they should
learn that the last yew bow was over the marches.

The material for a feast was ever at hand in days when, if there was
grim want in the cottage, there was at least rude plenty in the castle.
Within an hour the guests were seated around a board which creaked under
the great pasties and joints of meat, varied by those more dainty
dishes in which the French excelled, the spiced ortolan and the truffled
beccaficoes. The Lady Rochefort, a bright and laughter-loving dame, sat
upon the left of her warlike spouse, with Lady Tiphaine upon the right.
Beneath sat Du Guesclin and Sir Nigel, with Sir Amory Monticourt, of the
order of the Hospitallers, and Sir Otto Harnit, a wandering knight
from the kingdom of Bohemia. These with Alleyne and Ford, four French
squires, and the castle chaplain, made the company who sat together that
night and made good cheer in the Castle of Villefranche. The great fire
crackled in the grate, the hooded hawks slept upon their perches, the
rough deer-hounds with expectant eyes crouched upon the tiled floor;
close at the elbows of the guests stood the dapper little lilac-coated
pages; the laugh and jest circled round and all was harmony and comfort.
Little they recked of the brushwood men who crouched in their rags along
the fringe of the forest and looked with wild and haggard eyes at the
rich, warm glow which shot a golden bar of light from the high arched
windows of the castle.

Supper over, the tables dormant were cleared away as by magic and
trestles and bancals arranged around the blazing fire, for there was a
bitter nip in the air. The Lady Tiphaine had sunk back in her cushioned
chair, and her long dark lashes drooped low over her sparkling eyes.
Alleyne, glancing at her, noted that her breath came quick and short,
and that her cheeks had blanched to a lily white. Du Guesclin eyed her
keenly from time to time, and passed his broad brown fingers through his
crisp, curly black hair with the air of a man who is perplexed in his
mind.

�These folk here,� said the knight of Bohemia, �they do not seem too
well fed.�

�Ah, canaille!� cried the Lord of Villefranche. �You would scarce credit
it, and yet it is sooth that when I was taken at Poictiers it was all
that my wife and foster-brother could do to raise the money from them
for my ransom. The sulky dogs would rather have three twists of a rack,
or the thumbikins for an hour, than pay out a denier for their own
feudal father and liege lord. Yet there is not one of them but hath an
old stocking full of gold pieces hid away in a snug corner.�

�Why do they not buy food then?� asked Sir Nigel. �By St. Paul! it
seemed to me their bones were breaking through their skin.�

�It is their grutching and grumbling which makes them thin. We have a
saying here, Sir Nigel, that if you pummel Jacques Bonhomme he will pat
you, but if you pat him he will pummel you. Doubtless you find it so in
England.�

�Ma foi, no!� said Sir Nigel. �I have two Englishmen of this class in
my train, who are at this instant, I make little doubt, as full of your
wine as any cask in your cellar. He who pummelled them might come by
such a pat as he would be likely to remember.�

�I cannot understand it,� quoth the seneschal, �for the English knights
and nobles whom I have met were not men to brook the insolence of the
base born.�

�Perchance, my fair lord, the poor folk are sweeter and of a better
countenance in England,� laughed the Lady Rochefort. �Mon Dieu! you
cannot conceive to yourself how ugly they are! Without hair, without
teeth, all twisted and bent; for me, I cannot think how the good God
ever came to make such people. I cannot bear it, I, and so my trusty
Raoul goes ever before me with a cudgel to drive them from my path.�

�Yet they have souls, fair lady, they have souls!� murmured the
chaplain, a white-haired man with a weary, patient face.

�So I have heard you tell them,� said the lord of the castle; �and for
myself, father, though I am a true son of holy Church, yet I think
that you were better employed in saying your mass and in teaching the
children of my men-at-arms, than in going over the country-side to put
ideas in these folks' heads which would never have been there but for
you. I have heard that you have said to them that their souls are as
good as ours, and that it is likely that in another life they may stand
as high as the oldest blood of Auvergne. For my part, I believe that
there are so many worthy knights and gallant gentlemen in heaven who
know how such things should be arranged, that there is little fear that
we shall find ourselves mixed up with base roturiers and swine-herds.
Tell your beads, father, and con your psalter, but do not come between
me and those whom the king has given to me!�

�God help them!� cried the old priest. �A higher King than yours has
given them to me, and I tell you here in your own castle hall, Sir
Tristram de Rochefort, that you have sinned deeply in your dealings with
these poor folk, and that the hour will come, and may even now be at
hand, when God's hand will be heavy upon you for what you have done.� He
rose as he spoke, and walked slowly from the room.

�Pest take him!� cried the French knight. �Now, what is a man to do with
a priest, Sir Bertrand?--for one can neither fight him like a man nor
coax him like a woman.�

�Ah, Sir Bertrand knows, the naughty one!� cried the Lady Rochefort.
�Have we not all heard how he went to Avignon and squeezed fifty
thousand crowns out of the Pope.�

�Ma foi!� said Sir Nigel, looking with a mixture of horror and
admiration at Du Guesclin. �Did not your heart sink within you? Were you
not smitten with fears? Have you not felt a curse hang over you?�

�I have not observed it,� said the Frenchman carelessly. �But by Saint
Ives! Tristram, this chaplain of yours seems to me to be a worthy man,
and you should give heed to his words, for though I care nothing for
the curse of a bad pope, it would be a grief to me to have aught but a
blessing from a good priest.�

�Hark to that, my fair lord,� cried the Lady Rochefort. �Take heed, I
pray thee, for I do not wish to have a blight cast over me, nor a palsy
of the limbs. I remember that once before you angered Father Stephen,
and my tire-woman said that I lost more hair in seven days than ever
before in a month.�

�If that be sign of sin, then, by Saint Paul! I have much upon my soul,�
 said Sir Nigel, amid a general laugh. �But in very truth, Sir Tristram,
if I may venture a word of counsel, I should advise that you make your
peace with this good man.�

�He shall have four silver candlesticks,� said the seneschal moodily.
�And yet I would that he would leave the folk alone. You cannot conceive
in your mind how stubborn and brainless they are. Mules and pigs are
full of reason beside them. God He knows that I have had great patience
with them. It was but last week that, having to raise some money,
I called up to the castle Jean Goubert, who, as all men know, has a
casketful of gold pieces hidden away in some hollow tree. I give you my
word that I did not so much as lay a stripe upon his fool's back, but
after speaking with him, and telling him how needful the money was to
me, I left him for the night to think over the matter in my dungeon.
What think you that the dog did? Why, in the morning we found that he
had made a rope from strips of his leathern jerkin, and had hung himself
to the bar of the window.�

�For me, I cannot conceive such wickedness!� cried the lady.

�And there was Gertrude Le Boeuf, as fair a maiden as eye could see, but
as bad and bitter as the rest of them. When young Amory de Valance was
here last Lammastide he looked kindly upon the girl, and even spoke of
taking her into his service. What does she do, with her dog of a father?
Why, they tie themselves together and leap into the Linden Pool, where
the water is five spears'-lengths deep. I give you my word that it was
a great grief to young Amory, and it was days ere he could cast it
from his mind. But how can one serve people who are so foolish and so
ungrateful?�

Whilst the Seneschal of Villefranche had been detailing the evil doings
of his tenants, Alleyne had been unable to take his eyes from the face
of Lady Tiphaine. She had lain back in her chair, with drooping eyelids
and bloodless face, so that he had feared at first her journey had
weighed heavily upon her, and that the strength was ebbing out of her.
Of a sudden, however, there came a change, for a dash of bright color
flickered up on to either cheek, and her lids were slowly raised again
upon eyes which sparkled with such lustre as Alleyne had never seen
in human eyes before, while their gaze was fixed intently, not on the
company, but on the dark tapestry which draped the wall. So transformed
and so ethereal was her expression, that Alleyne, in his loftiest dream
of archangel or of seraph, had never pictured so sweet, so womanly, and
yet so wise a face. Glancing at Du Guesclin, Alleyne saw that he also
was watching his wife closely, and from the twitching of his features,
and the beads upon his brick-colored brow, it was easy to see that he
was deeply agitated by the change which he marked in her.

�How is it with you, lady?� he asked at last, in a tremulous voice.

Her eyes remained fixed intently upon the wall, and there was a long
pause ere she answered him. Her voice, too, which had been so clear
and ringing, was now low and muffled as that of one who speaks from a
distance.

�All is very well with me, Bertrand,� said she. �The blessed hour of
sight has come round to me again.�

�I could see it come! I could see it come!� he exclaimed, passing his
fingers through his hair with the same perplexed expression as before.

�This is untoward, Sir Tristram,� he said at last. �And I scarce know
in what words to make it clear to you, and to your fair wife, and to Sir
Nigel Loring, and to these other stranger knights. My tongue is a blunt
one, and fitter to shout word of command than to clear up such a matter
as this, of which I can myself understand little. This, however, I know,
that my wife is come of a very sainted race, whom God hath in His
wisdom endowed with wondrous powers, so that Tiphaine Raquenel was known
throughout Brittany ere ever I first saw her at Dinan. Yet these powers
are ever used for good, and they are the gift of God and not of the
devil, which is the difference betwixt white magic and black.�

�Perchance it would be as well that we should send for Father Stephen,�
 said Sir Tristram.

�It would be best that he should come,� cried the Hospitaller.

�And bring with him a flask of holy water,� added the knight of Bohemia.

�Not so, gentlemen,� answered Sir Bertrand. �It is not needful that this
priest should be called, and it is in my mind that in asking for this ye
cast some slight shadow or slur upon the good name of my wife, as though
it were still doubtful whether her power came to her from above or
below. If ye have indeed such a doubt I pray that you will say so, that
we may discuss the matter in a fitting way.�

�For myself,� said Sir Nigel, �I have heard such words fall from the
lips of this lady that I am of the opinion that there is no woman,
save only one, who can be in any way compared to her in beauty and in
goodness. Should any gentleman think otherwise, I should deem it great
honor to run a small course with him, or debate the matter in whatever
way might be most pleasing to him.�

�Nay, it would ill become me to cast a slur upon a lady who is both
my guest and the wife of my comrade-in-arms,� said the Seneschal of
Villefranche. �I have perceived also that on her mantle there is marked
a silver cross, which is surely sign enough that there is nought of evil
in these strange powers which you say that she possesses.�

This argument of the seneschal's appealed so powerfully to the Bohemian
and to the Hospitaller that they at once intimated that their objections
had been entirely overcome, while even the Lady Rochefort, who had sat
shivering and crossing herself, ceased to cast glances at the door, and
allowed her fears to turn to curiosity.

�Among the gifts which have been vouchsafed to my wife,� said Du
Guesclin, �there is the wondrous one of seeing into the future; but it
comes very seldom upon her, and goes as quickly, for none can command
it. The blessed hour of sight, as she hath named it, has come but twice
since I have known her, and I can vouch for it that all that she hath
told me was true, for on the evening of the Battle of Auray she said
that the morrow would be an ill day for me and for Charles of Blois.
Ere the sun had sunk again he was dead, and I the prisoner of Sir John
Chandos. Yet it is not every question that she can answer, but only
those----�

�Bertrand, Bertrand!� cried the lady in the same muttering far-away
voice, �the blessed hour passes. Use it, Bertrand, while you may.�

�I will, my sweet. Tell me, then, what fortune comes upon me?�

�Danger, Bertrand--deadly, pressing danger--which creeps upon you and
you know it not.�

The French soldier burst into a thunderous laugh, and his green eyes
twinkled with amusement. �At what time during these twenty years would
not that have been a true word?� he cried. �Danger is in the air that I
breathe. But is this so very close, Tiphaine?�

�Here--now--close upon you!� The words came out in broken, strenuous
speech, while the lady's fair face was writhed and drawn like that of
one who looks upon a horror which strikes the words from her lips. Du
Guesclin gazed round the tapestried room, at the screens, the tables,
the abace, the credence, the buffet with its silver salver, and the
half-circle of friendly, wondering faces. There was an utter stillness,
save for the sharp breathing of the Lady Tiphaine and for the gentle
soughing of the wind outside, which wafted to their ears the distant
call upon a swine-herd's horn.

�The danger may bide,� said he, shrugging his broad shoulders. �And now,
Tiphaine, tell us what will come of this war in Spain.�

�I can see little,� she answered, straining her eyes and puckering her
brow, as one who would fain clear her sight. �There are mountains, and
dry plains, and flash of arms and shouting of battle-cries. Yet it is
whispered to me that by failure you will succeed.�

�Ha! Sir Nigel, how like you that?� quoth Bertrand, shaking his head.
�It is like mead and vinegar, half sweet, half sour. And is there no
question which you would ask my lady?�

�Certes there is. I would fain know, fair lady, how all things are at
Twynham Castle, and above all how my sweet lady employs herself.�

�To answer this I would fain lay hand upon one whose thoughts turn
strongly to this castle which you have named. Nay, my Lord Loring, it is
whispered to me that there is another here who hath thought more deeply
of it than you.�

�Thought more of mine own home?� cried Sir Nigel. �Lady, I fear that in
this matter at least you are mistaken.�

�Not so, Sir Nigel. Come hither, young man, young English squire with
the gray eyes! Now give me your hand, and place it here across my brow,
that I may see that which you have seen. What is this that rises before
me? Mist, mist, rolling mist with a square black tower above it. See it
shreds out, it thins, it rises, and there lies a castle in green plain,
with the sea beneath it, and a great church within a bow-shot. There are
two rivers which run through the meadows, and between them lie the tents
of the besiegers.�

�The besiegers!� cried Alleyne, Ford, and Sir Nigel, all three in a
breath.

�Yes, truly, and they press hard upon the castle, for they are an
exceeding multitude and full of courage. See how they storm and rage
against the gate, while some rear ladders, and others, line after line,
sweep the walls with their arrows. There are many leaders who shout and
beckon, and one, a tall man with a golden beard, who stands before the
gate stamping his foot and hallooing them on, as a pricker doth the
hounds. But those in the castle fight bravely. There is a woman, two
women, who stand upon the walls, and give heart to the men-at-arms. They
shower down arrows, darts and great stones. Ah! they have struck down
the tall leader, and the others give back. The mist thickens and I can
see no more.�

�By Saint Paul!� said Sir Nigel, �I do not think that there can be any
such doings at Christchurch, and I am very easy of the fortalice so long
as my sweet wife hangs the key of the outer bailey at the head of her
bed. Yet I will not deny that you have pictured the castle as well as I
could have done myself, and I am full of wonderment at all that I have
heard and seen.�

�I would, Lady Tiphaine,� cried the Lady Rochefort, �that you would use
your power to tell me what hath befallen my golden bracelet which I wore
when hawking upon the second Sunday of Advent, and have never set eyes
upon since.�

�Nay, lady,� said du Guesclin, �it does not befit so great and wondrous
a power to pry and search and play the varlet even to the beautiful
chatelaine of Villefranche. Ask a worthy question, and, with the
blessing of God, you shall have a worthy answer.�

�Then I would fain ask,� cried one of the French squires, �as to which
may hope to conquer in these wars betwixt the English and ourselves.�

�Both will conquer and each will hold its own,� answered the Lady
Tiphaine.

�Then we shall still hold Gascony and Guienne?� cried Sir Nigel.

The lady shook her head. �French land, French blood, French speech,� she
answered. �They are French, and France shall have them.�

�But not Bordeaux?� cried Sir Nigel excitedly.

�Bordeaux also is for France.�

�But Calais?�

�Calais too.�

�Woe worth me then, and ill hail to these evil words! If Bordeaux and
Calais be gone, then what is left for England?�

�It seems indeed that there are evil times coming upon your country,�
 said Du Guesclin. �In our fondest hopes we never thought to hold
Bordeaux. By Saint Ives! this news hath warmed the heart within me. Our
dear country will then be very great in the future, Tiphaine?�

�Great, and rich, and beautiful,� she cried. �Far down the course of
time I can see her still leading the nations, a wayward queen among the
peoples, great in war, but greater in peace, quick in thought, deft in
action, with her people's will for her sole monarch, from the sands of
Calais to the blue seas of the south.�

�Ha!� cried Du Guesclin, with his eyes flashing in triumph, �you hear
her, Sir Nigel?--and she never yet said word which was not sooth.�

The English knight shook his head moodily. �What of my own poor
country?� said he. �I fear, lady, that what you have said bodes but
small good for her.�

The lady sat with parted lips, and her breath came quick and fast. �My
God!� she cried, �what is this that is shown me? Whence come they, these
peoples, these lordly nations, these mighty countries which rise up
before me? I look beyond, and others rise, and yet others, far and
farther to the shores of the uttermost waters. They crowd! They swarm!
The world is given to them, and it resounds with the clang of their
hammers and the ringing of their church bells. They call them many
names, and they rule them this way or that but they are all English,
for I can hear the voices of the people. On I go, and onwards over seas
where man hath never yet sailed, and I see a great land under new
stars and a stranger sky, and still the land is England. Where have her
children not gone? What have they not done? Her banner is planted on
ice. Her banner is scorched in the sun. She lies athwart the lands, and
her shadow is over the seas. Bertrand, Bertrand! we are undone for the
buds of her bud are even as our choicest flower!� Her voice rose into
a wild cry, and throwing up her arms she sank back white and nerveless
into the deep oaken chair.

�It is over,� said Du Guesclin moodily, as he raised her drooping head
with his strong brown hand. �Wine for the lady, squire! The blessed hour
of sight hath passed.�



CHAPTER XXX. HOW THE BRUSHWOOD MEN CAME TO THE CHATEAU OF VILLEFRANCHE.


It was late ere Alleyne Edricson, having carried Sir Nigel the goblet
of spiced wine which it was his custom to drink after the curling of his
hair, was able at last to seek his chamber. It was a stone-flagged room
upon the second floor, with a bed in a recess for him, and two smaller
pallets on the other side, on which Aylward and Hordle John were already
snoring. Alleyne had knelt down to his evening orisons, when there came
a tap at his door, and Ford entered with a small lamp in his hand. His
face was deadly pale, and his hand shook until the shadows flickered up
and down the wall.

�What is it, Ford?� cried Alleyne, springing to his feet.

�I can scarce tell you,� said he, sitting down on the side of the couch,
and resting his chin upon his hand. �I know not what to say or what to
think.�

�Has aught befallen you, then?�

�Yes, or I have been slave to my own fancy. I tell you, lad, that I am
all undone, like a fretted bow-string. Hark hither, Alleyne! it
cannot be that you have forgotten little Tita, the daughter of the old
glass-stainer at Bordeaux?�

�I remember her well.�

�She and I, Alleyne, broke the lucky groat together ere we parted, and
she wears my ring upon her finger. 'Caro mio,' quoth she when last we
parted, 'I shall be near thee in the wars, and thy danger will be my
danger.' Alleyne, as God is my help, as I came up the stairs this night
I saw her stand before me, her face in tears, her hands out as though in
warning--I saw it, Alleyne, even as I see those two archers upon their
couches. Our very finger-tips seemed to meet, ere she thinned away like
a mist in the sunshine.�

�I would not give overmuch thought to it,� answered Alleyne. �Our minds
will play us strange pranks, and bethink you that these words of the
Lady Tiphaine Du Guesclin have wrought upon us and shaken us.�

Ford shook his head. �I saw little Tita as clearly as though I were back
at the Rue des Apotres at Bordeaux,� said he. �But the hour is late, and
I must go.�

�Where do you sleep, then?�

�In the chamber above you. May the saints be with us all!� He rose
from the couch and left the chamber, while Alleyne could hear his feet
sounding upon the winding stair. The young squire walked across to the
window and gazed out at the moonlit landscape, his mind absorbed by
the thought of the Lady Tiphaine, and of the strange words that she
had spoken as to what was going forward at Castle Twynham. Leaning his
elbows upon the stonework, he was deeply plunged in reverie, when in a
moment his thoughts were brought back to Villefranche and to the scene
before him.

The window at which he stood was in the second floor of that portion of
the castle which was nearest to the keep. In front lay the broad moat,
with the moon lying upon its surface, now clear and round, now drawn
lengthwise as the breeze stirred the waters. Beyond, the plain sloped
down to a thick wood, while further to the left a second wood shut
out the view. Between the two an open glade stretched, silvered in the
moonshine, with the river curving across the lower end of it.

As he gazed, he saw of a sudden a man steal forth from the wood into the
open clearing. He walked with his head sunk, his shoulders curved, and
his knees bent, as one who strives hard to remain unseen. Ten paces from
the fringe of trees he glanced around, and waving his hand he crouched
down, and was lost to sight among a belt of furze-bushes. After him
there came a second man, and after him a third, a fourth, and a fifth
stealing across the narrow open space and darting into the shelter of
the brushwood. Nine-and-seventy Alleyne counted of these dark figures
flitting across the line of the moonlight. Many bore huge burdens upon
their backs, though what it was that they carried he could not tell at
the distance. Out of the one wood and into the other they passed, all
with the same crouching, furtive gait, until the black bristle of trees
had swallowed up the last of them.

For a moment Alleyne stood in the window, still staring down at the
silent forest, uncertain as to what he should think of these midnight
walkers. Then he bethought him that there was one beside him who was
fitter to judge on such a matter. His fingers had scarce rested upon
Aylward's shoulder ere the bowman was on his feet, with his hand
outstretched to his sword.

�Qui va?� he cried. �Hola! mon petit. By my hilt! I thought there had
been a camisade. What then, mon gar.?�

�Come hither by the window, Aylward,� said Alleyne. �I have seen
four-score men pass from yonder shaw across the glade, and nigh every
man of them had a great burden on his back. What think you of it?�

�I think nothing of it, mon camarade! There are as many masterless folk
in this country as there are rabbits on Cowdray Down, and there are many
who show their faces by night but would dance in a hempen collar if
they stirred forth in the day. On all the French marches are droves
of outcasts, reivers, spoilers, and draw-latches, of whom I judge that
these are some, though I marvel that they should dare to come so nigh
to the castle of the seneschal. All seems very quiet now,� he added,
peering out of the window.

�They are in the further wood,� said Alleyne.

�And there they may bide. Back to rest, mon petit; for, by my hilt! each
day now will bring its own work. Yet it would be well to shoot the bolt
in yonder door when one is in strange quarters. So!� He threw himself
down upon his pallet and in an instant was fast asleep.

It might have been about three o'clock in the morning when Alleyne was
aroused from a troubled sleep by a low cry or exclamation. He listened,
but, as he heard no more, he set it down as the challenge of the guard
upon the walls, and dropped off to sleep once more. A few minutes later
he was disturbed by a gentle creaking of his own door, as though some
one were pushing cautiously against it, and immediately afterwards he
heard the soft thud of cautious footsteps upon the stair which led
to the room above, followed by a confused noise and a muffled groan.
Alleyne sat up on his couch with all his nerves in a tingle, uncertain
whether these sounds might come from a simple cause--some sick archer
and visiting leech perhaps--or whether they might have a more sinister
meaning. But what danger could threaten them here in this strong castle,
under the care of famous warriors, with high walls and a broad moat
around them? Who was there that could injure them? He had well-nigh
persuaded himself that his fears were a foolish fancy, when his eyes
fell upon that which sent the blood cold to his heart and left him
gasping, with hands clutching at the counterpane.

Right in front of him was the broad window of the chamber, with the moon
shining brightly through it. For an instant something had obscured the
light, and now a head was bobbing up and down outside, the face looking
in at him, and swinging slowly from one side of the window to the other.
Even in that dim light there could be no mistaking those features.
Drawn, distorted and blood-stained, they were still those of the young
fellow-squire who had sat so recently upon his own couch. With a cry of
horror Alleyne sprang from his bed and rushed to the casement, while the
two archers, aroused by the sound, seized their weapons and stared about
them in bewilderment. One glance was enough to show Edricson that his
fears were but too true. Foully murdered, with a score of wounds upon
him and a rope round his neck, his poor friend had been cast from
the upper window and swung slowly in the night wind, his body rasping
against the wall and his disfigured face upon a level with the casement.

�My God!� cried Alleyne, shaking in every limb. �What has come upon us?
What devil's deed is this?�

�Here is flint and steel,� said John stolidly. �The lamp, Aylward! This
moonshine softens a man's heart. Now we may use the eyes which God hath
given us.�

�By my hilt!� cried Aylward, as the yellow flame flickered up, �it is
indeed young master Ford, and I think that this seneschal is a black
villain, who dare not face us in the day but would murther us in our
sleep. By the twang of string! if I do not soak a goose's feather with
his heart's blood, it will be no fault of Samkin Aylward of the White
Company.�

�But, Aylward, think of the men whom I saw yesternight,� said Alleyne.
�It may not be the seneschal. It may be that others have come into the
castle. I must to Sir Nigel ere it be too late. Let me go, Aylward, for
my place is by his side.�

�One moment, mon gar. Put that steel head-piece on the end of my
yew-stave. So! I will put it first through the door; for it is ill to
come out when you can neither see nor guard yourself. Now, camarades,
out swords and stand ready! Hola, by my hilt! it is time that we were
stirring!�

As he spoke, a sudden shouting broke forth in the castle, with the
scream of a woman and the rush of many feet. Then came the sharp clink
of clashing steel, and a roar like that of an angry lion--�Notre Dame Du
Guesclin! St. Ives! St. Ives!� The bow-man pulled back the bolt of the
door, and thrust out the headpiece at the end of the bow. A clash, the
clatter of the steel-cap upon the ground, and, ere the man who struck
could heave up for another blow, the archer had passed his sword through
his body. �On, camarades, on!� he cried; and, breaking fiercely past two
men who threw themselves in his way, he sped down the broad corridor in
the direction of the shouting.

A sharp turning, and then a second one, brought them to the head of a
short stair, from which they looked straight down upon the scene of the
uproar. A square oak-floored hall lay beneath them, from which opened
the doors of the principal guest-chambers. This hall was as light as
day, for torches burned in numerous sconces upon the walls, throwing
strange shadows from the tusked or antlered heads which ornamented them.
At the very foot of the stair, close to the open door of their chamber,
lay the seneschal and his wife: she with her head shorn from her
shoulders, he thrust through with a sharpened stake, which still
protruded from either side of his body. Three servants of the castle lay
dead beside them, all torn and draggled, as though a pack of wolves had
been upon them. In front of the central guest-chamber stood Du Guesclin
and Sir Nigel, half-clad and unarmored, with the mad joy of battle
gleaming in their eyes. Their heads were thrown back, their lips
compressed, their blood-stained swords poised over their right
shoulders, and their left feet thrown out. Three dead men lay huddled
together in front of them: while a fourth, with the blood squirting
from a severed vessel, lay back with updrawn knees, breathing in
wheezy gasps. Further back--all panting together, like the wind in a
tree--there stood a group of fierce, wild creatures, bare-armed and
bare-legged, gaunt, unshaven, with deep-set murderous eyes and wild
beast faces. With their flashing teeth, their bristling hair, their mad
leapings and screamings, they seemed to Alleyne more like fiends from
the pit than men of flesh and blood. Even as he looked, they broke
into a hoarse yell and dashed once more upon the two knights, hurling
themselves madly upon their sword-points; clutching, scrambling, biting,
tearing, careless of wounds if they could but drag the two soldiers to
earth. Sir Nigel was thrown down by the sheer weight of them, and Sir
Bertrand with his thunderous war-cry was swinging round his heavy sword
to clear a space for him to rise, when the whistle of two long English
arrows, and the rush of the squire and the two English archers down the
stairs, turned the tide of the combat. The assailants gave back, the
knights rushed forward, and in a very few moments the hall was cleared,
and Hordle John had hurled the last of the wild men down the steep steps
which led from the end of it.

�Do not follow them,� cried Du Guesclin. �We are lost if we scatter. For
myself I care not a denier, though it is a poor thing to meet one's end
at the hands of such scum; but I have my dear lady here, who must by no
means be risked. We have breathing-space now, and I would ask you, Sir
Nigel, what it is that you would counsel?�

�By St. Paul!� answered Sir Nigel, �I can by no means understand what
hath befallen us, save that I have been woken up by your battle-cry,
and, rushing forth, found myself in the midst of this small bickering.
Harrow and alas for the lady and the seneschal! What dogs are they who
have done this bloody deed?�

�They are the Jacks, the men of the brushwood. They have the castle,
though I know not how it hath come to pass. Look from this window into
the bailey.�

�By heaven!� cried Sir Nigel, �it is as bright as day with the torches.
The gates stand open, and there are three thousand of them within the
walls. See how they rush and scream and wave! What is it that they
thrust out through the postern door? My God! it is a man-at-arms, and
they pluck him limb from limb like hounds on a wolf. Now another, and
yet another. They hold the whole castle, for I see their faces at the
windows. See, there are some with great bundles on their backs.�

�It is dried wood from the forest. They pile them against the walls and
set them in a blaze. Who is this who tries to check them? By St. Ives!
it is the good priest who spake for them in the hall. He kneels, he
prays, he implores! What! villains, would ye raise hands against those
who have befriended you? Ah, the butcher has struck him! He is down!
They stamp him under their feet! They tear off his gown and wave it in
the air! See now, how the flames lick up the walls! Are there none left
to rally round us? With a hundred men we might hold our own.�

�Oh, for my Company!� cried Sir Nigel. �But where is Ford, Alleyne?�

�He is foully murdered, my fair lord.�

�The saints receive him! May he rest in peace! But here come some at
last who may give us counsel, for amid these passages it is ill to stir
without a guide.�

As he spoke, a French squire and the Bohemian knight came rushing down
the steps, the latter bleeding from a slash across his forehead.

�All is lost!� he cried. �The castle is taken and on fire, the seneschal
is slain, and there is nought left for us.�

�On the contrary,� quoth Sir Nigel, �there is much left to us, for there
is a very honorable contention before us, and a fair lady for whom to
give our lives. There are many ways in which a man might die, but none
better than this.�

�You can tell us, Godfrey,� said Du Guesclin to the French squire: �how
came these men into the castle, and what succors can we count upon? By
St. Ives! if we come not quickly to some counsel we shall be burned like
young rooks in a nest.�

The squire, a dark, slender stripling, spoke firmly and quickly, as one
who was trained to swift action. �There is a passage under the earth
into the castle,� said he, �and through it some of the Jacks made their
way, casting open the gates for the others. They have had help from
within the walls, and the men-at-arms were heavy with wine: they must
have been slain in their beds, for these devils crept from room to room
with soft step and ready knife. Sir Amory the Hospitaller was struck
down with an axe as he rushed before us from his sleeping-chamber. Save
only ourselves, I do not think that there are any left alive.�

�What, then, would you counsel?�

�That we make for the keep. It is unused, save in time of war, and the
key hangs from my poor lord and master's belt.�

�There are two keys there.�

�It is the larger. Once there, we might hold the narrow stair; and at
least, as the walls are of a greater thickness, it would be longer ere
they could burn them. Could we but carry the lady across the bailey, all
might be well with us.�

�Nay; the lady hath seen something of the work of war,� said Tiphaine
coming forth, as white, as grave, and as unmoved as ever. �I would not
be a hamper to you, my dear spouse and gallant friend. Rest assured of
this, that if all else fail I have always a safeguard here�--drawing a
small silver-hilted poniard from her bosom--�which sets me beyond the
fear of these vile and blood-stained wretches.�

�Tiphaine,� cried Du Guesclin, �I have always loved you; and now, by Our
Lady of Rennes! I love you more than ever. Did I not know that your hand
will be as ready as your words I would myself turn my last blow upon
you, ere you should fall into their hands. Lead on, Godfrey! A new
golden pyx will shine in the minster of Dinan if we come safely through
with it.�

The attention of the insurgents had been drawn away from murder to
plunder, and all over the castle might be heard their cries and whoops
of delight as they dragged forth the rich tapestries, the silver
flagons, and the carved furniture. Down in the courtyard half-clad
wretches, their bare limbs all mottled with blood-stains, strutted
about with plumed helmets upon their heads, or with the Lady Rochefort's
silken gowns girt round their loins and trailing on the ground behind
them. Casks of choice wine had been rolled out from the cellars, and
starving peasants squatted, goblet in hand, draining off vintages which
De Rochefort had set aside for noble and royal guests. Others, with
slabs of bacon and joints of dried meat upon the ends of their pikes,
held them up to the blaze or tore at them ravenously with their teeth.
Yet all order had not been lost amongst them, for some hundreds of the
better armed stood together in a silent group, leaning upon their rude
weapons and looking up at the fire, which had spread so rapidly as to
involve one whole side of the castle. Already Alleyne could hear the
crackling and roaring of the flames, while the air was heavy with heat
and full of the pungent whiff of burning wood.



CHAPTER XXXI. HOW FIVE MEN HELD THE KEEP OF VILLEFRANCHE


Under the guidance of the French squire the party passed down two narrow
corridors. The first was empty, but at the head of the second stood a
peasant sentry, who started off at the sight of them, yelling loudly to
his comrades. �Stop him, or we are undone!� cried Du Guesclin, and had
started to run, when Aylward's great war-bow twanged like a harp-string,
and the man fell forward upon his face, with twitching limbs and
clutching fingers. Within five paces of where he lay a narrow and
little-used door led out into the bailey. From beyond it came such a
Babel of hooting and screaming, horrible oaths and yet more horrible
laughter, that the stoutest heart might have shrunk from casting down
the frail barrier which faced them.

�Make straight for the keep!� said Du Guesclin, in a sharp, stern
whisper. �The two archers in front, the lady in the centre, a squire
on either side, while we three knights shall bide behind and beat back
those who press upon us. So! Now open the door, and God have us in his
holy keeping!�

For a few moments it seemed that their object would be attained without
danger, so swift and so silent had been their movements. They were
half-way across the bailey ere the frantic, howling peasants made a
movement to stop them. The few who threw themselves in their way were
overpowered or brushed aside, while the pursuers were beaten back by the
ready weapons of the three cavaliers. Unscathed they fought their way to
the door of the keep, and faced round upon the swarming mob, while the
squire thrust the great key into the lock.

�My God!� he cried, �it is the wrong key.�

�The wrong key!�

�Dolt, fool that I am! This is the key of the castle gate; the other
opens the keep. I must back for it!� He turned, with some wild intention
of retracing his steps, but at the instant a great jagged rock, hurled
by a brawny peasant, struck him full upon the ear, and he dropped
senseless to the ground.

�This is key enough for me!� quoth Hordle John, picking up the huge
stone, and hurling it against the door with all the strength of his
enormous body. The lock shivered, the wood smashed, the stone flew into
five pieces, but the iron clamps still held the door in its position.
Bending down, he thrust his great fingers under it, and with a heave
raised the whole mass of wood and iron from its hinges. For a moment it
tottered and swayed, and then, falling outward, buried him in its ruin,
while his comrades rushed into the dark archway which led to safety.

�Up the steps, Tiphaine!� cried Du Guesclin. �Now round, friends, and
beat them back!� The mob of peasants had surged in upon their heels, but
the two trustiest blades in Europe gleamed upon that narrow stair, and
four of their number dropped upon the threshold. The others gave back,
and gathered in a half circle round the open door, gnashing their teeth
and shaking their clenched hands at the defenders. The body of the
French squire had been dragged out by them and hacked to pieces. Three
or four others had pulled John from under the door, when he suddenly
bounded to his feet, and clutching one in either hand dashed them
together with such force that they fell senseless across each other upon
the ground. With a kick and a blow he freed himself from two others
who clung to him, and in a moment he was within the portal with his
comrades.

Yet their position was a desperate one. The peasants from far and near
had been assembled for this deed of vengeance, and not less than six
thousand were within or around the walls of the Chateau of Villefranche.
Ill armed and half starved, they were still desperate men, to whom
danger had lost all fears: for what was death that they should shun
it to cling to such a life as theirs? The castle was theirs, and the
roaring flames were spurting through the windows and flickering high
above the turrets on two sides of the quadrangle. From either side they
were sweeping down from room to room and from bastion to bastion in the
direction of the keep. Faced by an army, and girt in by fire, were six
men and one woman; but some of them were men so trained to danger and
so wise in war that even now the combat was less unequal than it seemed.
Courage and resource were penned in by desperation and numbers, while
the great yellow sheets of flame threw their lurid glare over the scene
of death.

�There is but space for two upon a step to give free play to our
sword-arms,� said Du Guesclin. �Do you stand with me, Nigel, upon the
lowest. France and England will fight together this night. Sir Otto, I
pray you to stand behind us with this young squire. The archers may go
higher yet and shoot over our heads. I would that we had our harness,
Nigel.�

�Often have I heard my dear Sir John Chandos say that a knight should
never, even when a guest, be parted from it. Yet it will be more honor
to us if we come well out of it. We have a vantage, since we see them
against the light and they can scarce see us. It seems to me that they
muster for an onslaught.�

�If we can but keep them in play,� said the Bohemian, �it is likely
that these flames may bring us succor if there be any true men in the
country.�

�Bethink you, my fair lord,� said Alleyne to Sir Nigel, �that we have
never injured these men, nor have we cause of quarrel against them.
Would it not be well, if but for the lady's sake, to speak them fair and
see if we may not come to honorable terms with them?�

�Not so, by St. Paul!� cried Sir Nigel. �It does not accord with mine
honor, nor shall it ever be said that I, a knight of England, was ready
to hold parley with men who have slain a fair lady and a holy priest.�

�As well hold parley with a pack of ravening wolves,� said the French
captain. �Ha! Notre Dame Du Guesclin! Saint Ives! Saint Ives!�

As he thundered forth his war-cry, the Jacks who had been gathering
before the black arch of the gateway rushed in madly in a desperate
effort to carry the staircase. Their leaders were a small man, dark in
the face, with his beard done up in two plaits, and another larger man,
very bowed in the shoulders, with a huge club studded with sharp nails
in his hand. The first had not taken three steps ere an arrow from
Aylward's bow struck him full in the chest, and he fell coughing and
spluttering across the threshold. The other rushed onwards, and breaking
between Du Guesclin and Sir Nigel he dashed out the brains of the
Bohemian with a single blow of his clumsy weapon. With three swords
through him he still struggled on, and had almost won his way through
them ere he fell dead upon the stair. Close at his heels came a hundred
furious peasants, who flung themselves again and again against the five
swords which confronted them. It was cut and parry and stab as quick as
eye could see or hand act. The door was piled with bodies, and the stone
floor was slippery with blood. The deep shout of Du Guesclin, the hard,
hissing breath of the pressing multitude, the clatter of steel, the
thud of falling bodies, and the screams of the stricken, made up such
a medley as came often in after years to break upon Alleyne's sleep.
Slowly and sullenly at last the throng drew off, with many a fierce
backward glance, while eleven of their number lay huddled in front of
the stair which they had failed to win.

�The dogs have had enough,� said Du Guesclin.

�By Saint Paul! there appear to be some very worthy and valiant persons
among them,� observed Sir Nigel. �They are men from whom, had they been
of better birth, much honor and advancement might be gained. Even as it
is, it is a great pleasure to have seen them. But what is this that they
are bringing forward?�

�It is as I feared,� growled Du Guesclin. �They will burn us out, since
they cannot win their way past us. Shoot straight and hard, archers;
for, by St. Ives! our good swords are of little use to us.�

As he spoke, a dozen men rushed forward, each screening himself behind a
huge fardel of brushwood. Hurling their burdens in one vast heap within
the portal, they threw burning torches upon the top of it. The wood
had been soaked in oil, for in an instant it was ablaze, and a long,
hissing, yellow flame licked over the heads of the defenders, and drove
them further up to the first floor of the keep. They had scarce reached
it, however, ere they found that the wooden joists and planks of the
flooring were already on fire. Dry and worm-eaten, a spark upon them
became a smoulder, and a smoulder a blaze. A choking smoke filled the
air, and the five could scarce grope their way to the staircase which
led up to the very summit of the square tower.

Strange was the scene which met their eyes from this eminence. Beneath
them on every side stretched the long sweep of peaceful country,
rolling plain, and tangled wood, all softened and mellowed in the silver
moonshine. No light, nor movement, nor any sign of human aid could be
seen, but far away the hoarse clangor of a heavy bell rose and fell upon
the wintry air. Beneath and around them blazed the huge fire, roaring
and crackling on every side of the bailey, and even as they looked the
two corner turrets fell in with a deafening crash, and the whole castle
was but a shapeless mass, spouting flames and smoke from every window
and embrasure. The great black tower upon which they stood rose like a
last island of refuge amid this sea of fire but the ominous crackling
and roaring below showed that it would not be long ere it was engulfed
also in the common ruin. At their very feet was the square courtyard,
crowded with the howling and dancing peasants, their fierce faces
upturned, their clenched hands waving, all drunk with bloodshed and with
vengeance. A yell of execration and a scream of hideous laughter burst
from the vast throng, as they saw the faces of the last survivors of
their enemies peering down at them from the height of the keep. They
still piled the brushwood round the base of the tower, and gambolled
hand in hand around the blaze, screaming out the doggerel lines which
had long been the watchword of the Jacquerie:

        Cessez, cessez, gens d'armes et pietons,
        De piller et manger le bonhomme
        Qui de longtemps Jacques Bonhomme
          Se nomme.

Their thin, shrill voices rose high above the roar of the flames and the
crash of the masonry, like the yelping of a pack of wolves who see their
quarry before them and know that they have well-nigh run him down.

�By my hilt!� said Aylward to John, �it is in my mind that we shall not
see Spain this journey. It is a great joy to me that I have placed
my feather-bed and other things of price with that worthy woman at
Lyndhurst, who will now have the use of them. I have thirteen arrows
yet, and if one of them fly unfleshed, then, by the twang of string! I
shall deserve my doom. First at him who flaunts with my lady's silken
frock. Clap in the clout, by God! though a hand's-breadth lower than
I had meant. Now for the rogue with the head upon his pike. Ha! to
the inch, John. When my eye is true, I am better at rovers than at
long-butts or hoyles. A good shoot for you also, John! The villain hath
fallen forward into the fire. But I pray you, John, to loose gently, and
not to pluck with the drawing-hand, for it is a trick that hath marred
many a fine bowman.�

Whilst the two archers were keeping up a brisk fire upon the mob beneath
them, Du Guesclin and his lady were consulting with Sir Nigel upon their
desperate situation.

�'Tis a strange end for one who has seen so many stricken fields,� said
the French chieftain. �For me one death is as another, but it is the
thought of my sweet lady which goes to my heart.�

�Nay, Bertrand, I fear it as little as you,� said she. �Had I my dearest
wish, it would be that we should go together.�

�Well answered, fair lady!� cried Sir Nigel. �And very sure I am that my
own sweet wife would have said the same. If the end be now come, I have
had great good fortune in having lived in times when so much glory was
to be won, and in knowing so many valiant gentlemen and knights. But why
do you pluck my sleeve, Alleyne?�

�If it please you, my fair lord, there are in this corner two great
tubes of iron, with many heavy balls, which may perchance be those
bombards and shot of which I have heard.�

�By Saint Ives! it is true,� cried Sir Bertrand, striding across to
the recess where the ungainly, funnel-shaped, thick-ribbed engines were
standing. �Bombards they are, and of good size. We may shoot down upon
them.�

�Shoot with them, quotha?� cried Aylward in high disdain, for pressing
danger is the great leveller of classes. �How is a man to take aim with
these fool's toys, and how can he hope to do scath with them?�

�I will show you,� answered Sir Nigel; �for here is the great box of
powder, and if you will raise it for me, John, I will show you how it
may be used. Come hither, where the folk are thickest round the fire.
Now, Aylward, crane thy neck and see what would have been deemed an old
wife's tale when we first turned our faces to the wars. Throw back the
lid, John, and drop the box into the fire!�

A deafening roar, a fluff of bluish light, and the great square tower
rocked and trembled from its very foundations, swaying this way and that
like a reed in the wind. Amazed and dizzy, the defenders, clutching at
the cracking parapets for support, saw great stones, burning beams of
wood, and mangled bodies hurtling past them through the air. When they
staggered to their feet once more, the whole keep had settled down upon
one side, so that they could scarce keep their footing upon the sloping
platform. Gazing over the edge, they looked down upon the horrible
destruction which had been caused by the explosion. For forty yards
round the portal the ground was black with writhing, screaming figures,
who struggled up and hurled themselves down again, tossing this way
and that, sightless, scorched, with fire bursting from their tattered
clothing. Beyond this circle of death their comrades, bewildered and
amazed, cowered away from this black tower and from these invincible
men, who were most to be dreaded when hope was furthest from their
hearts.

�A sally, Du Guesclin, a sally!� cried Sir Nigel. �By Saint Paul! they
are in two minds, and a bold rush may turn them.� He drew his sword as
he spoke and darted down the winding stairs, closely followed by his
four comrades. Ere he was at the first floor, however, he threw up his
arms and stopped. �Mon Dieu!� he said, �we are lost men!�

�What then?� cried those behind him.

�The wall hath fallen in, the stair is blocked, and the fire still rages
below. By Saint Paul! friends, we have fought a very honorable fight,
and may say in all humbleness that we have done our devoir, but I think
that we may now go back to the Lady Tiphaine and say our orisons, for we
have played our parts in this world, and it is time that we made ready
for another.�

The narrow pass was blocked by huge stones littered in wild confusion
over each other, with the blue choking smoke reeking up through the
crevices. The explosion had blown in the wall and cut off the only path
by which they could descend. Pent in, a hundred feet from earth, with
a furnace raging under them and a ravening multitude all round who
thirsted for their blood, it seemed indeed as though no men had ever
come through such peril with their lives. Slowly they made their way
back to the summit, but as they came out upon it the Lady Tiphaine
darted forward and caught her husband by the wrist.

�Bertrand,� said she, �hush and listen! I have heard the voices of men
all singing together in a strange tongue.�

Breathless they stood and silent, but no sound came up to them, save the
roar of the flames and the clamor of their enemies.

�It cannot be, lady,� said Du Guesclin. �This night hath over wrought
you, and your senses play you false. What men are there in this country
who would sing in a strange tongue?�

�Hola!� yelled Aylward, leaping suddenly into the air with waving hands
and joyous face. �I thought I heard it ere we went down, and now I hear
it again. We are saved, comrades! By these ten finger-bones, we are
saved! It is the marching song of the White Company. Hush!�

With upraised forefinger and slanting head, he stood listening. Suddenly
there came swelling up a deep-voiced, rollicking chorus from somewhere
out of the darkness. Never did choice or dainty ditty of Provence or
Languedoc sound more sweetly in the ears than did the rough-tongued
Saxon to the six who strained their ears from the blazing keep:

        We'll drink all together
        To the gray goose feather
          And the land where the gray goose flew.

�Ha, by my hilt!� shouted Aylward, �it is the dear old bow song of the
Company. Here come two hundred as tight lads as ever twirled a shaft
over their thumbnails. Hark to the dogs, how lustily they sing!�

Nearer and clearer, swelling up out of the night, came the gay marching
lilt:

        What of the bow?
           The bow was made in England.
        Of true wood, of yew wood,
           The wood of English bows;
        For men who are free
        Love the old yew-tree
           And the land where the yew tree grows.

        What of the men?
           The men were bred in England,
        The bowmen, the yeomen,
           The lads of the dale and fell,
        Here's to you and to you,
        To the hearts that are true,
           And the land where the true hearts dwell.

�They sing very joyfully,� said Du Guesclin, �as though they were going
to a festival.�

�It is their wont when there is work to be done.�

�By Saint Paul!� quoth Sir Nigel, �it is in my mind that they come too
late, for I cannot see how we are to come down from this tower.�

�There they come, the hearts of gold!� cried Aylward. �See, they move
out from the shadow. Now they cross the meadow. They are on the further
side of the moat. Hola camarades, hola! Johnston, Eccles, Cooke,
Harward, Bligh! Would ye see a fair lady and two gallant knights done
foully to death?�

�Who is there?� shouted a deep voice from below. �Who is this who speaks
with an English tongue?�

�It is I, old lad. It is Sam Aylward of the Company; and here is your
captain, Sir Nigel Loring, and four others, all laid out to be grilled
like an Easterling's herrings.�

�Curse me if I did not think that it was the style of speech of old
Samkin Aylward,� said the voice, amid a buzz from the ranks. �Wherever
there are knocks going there is Sammy in the heart of it. But who are
these ill-faced rogues who block the path? To your kennels, canaille!
What! you dare look us in the eyes? Out swords, lads, and give them the
flat of them! Waste not your shafts upon such runagate knaves.�

There was little fight left in the peasants, however, still dazed by the
explosion, amazed at their own losses and disheartened by the arrival of
the disciplined archers. In a very few minutes they were in full flight
for their brushwood homes, leaving the morning sun to rise upon a
blackened and blood-stained ruin, where it had left the night before the
magnificent castle of the Seneschal of Auvergne. Already the white lines
in the east were deepening into pink as the archers gathered round the
keep and took counsel how to rescue the survivors.

�Had we a rope,� said Alleyne, �there is one side which is not yet on
fire, down which we might slip.�

�But how to get a rope?�

�It is an old trick,� quoth Aylward. �Hola! Johnston, cast me up a rope,
even as you did at Maupertuis in the war time.�

The grizzled archer thus addressed took several lengths of rope from his
comrades, and knotting them firmly together, he stretched them out in
the long shadow which the rising sun threw from the frowning keep. Then
he fixed the yew-stave of his bow upon end and measured the long, thin,
black line which it threw upon the turf.

�A six-foot stave throws a twelve-foot shadow,� he muttered. �The keep
throws a shadow of sixty paces. Thirty paces of rope will be enow and to
spare. Another strand, Watkin! Now pull at the end that all may be safe.
So! It is ready for them.�

�But how are they to reach it?� asked the young archer beside him.

�Watch and see, young fool's-head,� growled the old bowman. He took a
long string from his pouch and fastened one end to an arrow.

�All ready, Samkin?�

�Ready, camarade.�

�Close to your hand then.� With an easy pull he sent the shaft
flickering gently up, falling upon the stonework within a foot of where
Aylward was standing. The other end was secured to the rope, so that in
a minute a good strong cord was dangling from the only sound side of the
blazing and shattered tower. The Lady Tiphaine was lowered with a noose
drawn fast under the arms, and the other five slid swiftly down, amid
the cheers and joyous outcry of their rescuers.



CHAPTER XXXII. HOW THE COMPANY TOOK COUNSEL ROUND THE FALLEN TREE.


�Where is Sir Claude Latour?� asked Sir Nigel, as his feet touched
ground.

�He is in camp, near Montpezat, two hours' march from here, my fair
lord,� said Johnston, the grizzled bowman who commanded the archers.

�Then we shall march thither, for I would fain have you all back at Dax
in time to be in the prince's vanguard.�

�My lord,� cried Alleyne, joyfully, �here are our chargers in the field,
and I see your harness amid the plunder which these rogues have left
behind them.�

�By Saint Ives! you speak sooth, young squire,� said Du Guesclin. �There
is my horse and my lady's jennet. The knaves led them from the stables,
but fled without them. Now, Nigel, it is great joy to me to have seen
one of whom I have often heard. Yet we must leave you now, for I must be
with the King of Spain ere your army crosses the mountains.�

�I had thought that you were in Spain with the valiant Henry of
Trastamare.�

�I have been there, but I came to France to raise succor for him. I
shall ride back, Nigel, with four thousand of the best lances of France
at my back, so that your prince may find he hath a task which is worthy
of him. God be with you, friend, and may we meet again in better times!�

�I do not think,� said Sir Nigel, as he stood by Alleyne's side looking
after the French knight and his lady, �that in all Christendom you will
meet with a more stout-hearted man or a fairer and sweeter dame. But
your face is pale and sad, Alleyne! Have you perchance met with some
hurt during the ruffle?�

�Nay, my fair lord, I was but thinking of my friend Ford, and how he sat
upon my couch no later than yesternight.�

Sir Nigel shook his head sadly. �Two brave squires have I lost,� said
he. �I know not why the young shoots should be plucked, and an old weed
left standing, yet certes there must be some good reason, since God hath
so planned it. Did you not note, Alleyne, that the Lady Tiphaine did
give us warning last night that danger was coming upon us?�

�She did, my lord.�

�By Saint Paul! my mind misgives me as to what she saw at Twynham
Castle. And yet I cannot think that any Scottish or French rovers could
land in such force as to beleaguer the fortalice. Call the Company
together, Aylward; and let us on, for it will be shame to us if we are
not at Dax upon the trysting day.�

The archers had spread themselves over the ruins, but a blast upon a
bugle brought them all back to muster, with such booty as they could
bear with them stuffed into their pouches or slung over their shoulders.
As they formed into ranks, each man dropping silently into his place,
Sir Nigel ran a questioning eye over them, and a smile of pleasure
played over his face. Tall and sinewy, and brown, clear-eyed,
hard-featured, with the stern and prompt bearing of experienced
soldiers, it would be hard indeed for a leader to seek for a choicer
following. Here and there in the ranks were old soldiers of the French
wars, grizzled and lean, with fierce, puckered features and shaggy,
bristling brows. The most, however, were young and dandy archers, with
fresh English faces, their beards combed out, their hair curling from
under their close steel hufkens, with gold or jewelled earrings gleaming
in their ears, while their gold-spangled baldrics, their silken belts,
and the chains which many of them wore round their thick brown necks,
all spoke of the brave times which they had had as free companions. Each
had a yew or hazel stave slung over his shoulder, plain and serviceable
with the older men, but gaudily painted and carved at either end with
the others. Steel caps, mail brigandines, white surcoats with the red
lion of St. George, and sword or battle-axe swinging from their belts,
completed this equipment, while in some cases the murderous maule or
five-foot mallet was hung across the bowstave, being fastened to their
leathern shoulder-belt by a hook in the centre of the handle. Sir
Nigel's heart beat high as he looked upon their free bearing and
fearless faces.

For two hours they marched through forest and marshland, along the left
bank of the river Aveyron; Sir Nigel riding behind his Company, with
Alleyne at his right hand, and Johnston, the old master bowman, walking
by his left stirrup. Ere they had reached their journey's end the knight
had learned all that he would know of his men, their doings and their
intentions. Once, as they marched, they saw upon the further bank of the
river a body of French men-at-arms, riding very swiftly in the direction
of Villefranche.

�It is the Seneschal of Toulouse, with his following,� said Johnston,
shading his eyes with his hand. �Had he been on this side of the water
he might have attempted something upon us.�

�I think that it would be well that we should cross,� said Sir Nigel.
�It were pity to balk this worthy seneschal, should he desire to try
some small feat of arms.�

�Nay, there is no ford nearer than Tourville,� answered the old archer.
�He is on his way to Villefranche, and short will be the shrift of any
Jacks who come into his hands, for he is a man of short speech. It
was he and the Seneschal of Beaucaire who hung Peter Wilkins, of the
Company, last Lammastide; for which, by the black rood of Waltham! they
shall hang themselves, if ever they come into our power. But here are
our comrades, Sir Nigel, and here is our camp.�

As he spoke, the forest pathway along which they marched opened out into
a green glade, which sloped down towards the river. High, leafless trees
girt it in on three sides, with a thick undergrowth of holly between
their trunks. At the farther end of this forest clearing there stood
forty or fifty huts, built very neatly from wood and clay, with the
blue smoke curling out from the roofs. A dozen tethered horses and mules
grazed around the encampment, while a number of archers lounged about:
some shooting at marks, while others built up great wooden fires in the
open, and hung their cooking kettles above them. At the sight of their
returning comrades there was a shout of welcome, and a horseman, who
had been exercising his charger behind the camp, came cantering down
to them. He was a dapper, brisk man, very richly clad, with a round,
clean-shaven face, and very bright black eyes, which danced and sparkled
with excitement.

�Sir Nigel!� he cried. �Sir Nigel Loring, at last! By my soul we have
awaited you this month past. Right welcome, Sir Nigel! You have had my
letter?�

�It was that which brought me here,� said Sir Nigel. �But indeed, Sir
Claude Latour, it is a great wonder to me that you did not yourself lead
these bowmen, for surely they could have found no better leader?�

�None, none, by the Virgin of L'Esparre!� he cried, speaking in the
strange, thick Gascon speech which turns every _v_ into a _b_. �But you
know what these islanders of yours are, Sir Nigel. They will not be led
by any save their own blood and race. There is no persuading them.
Not even I, Claude Latour Seigneur of Montchateau, master of the high
justice, the middle and the low, could gain their favor. They must needs
hold a council and put their two hundred thick heads together, and then
there comes this fellow Aylward and another, as their spokesmen, to say
that they will disband unless an Englishman of good name be set over
them. There are many of them, as I understand, who come from some great
forest which lies in Hampi, or Hampti--I cannot lay my tongue to the
name. Your dwelling is in those parts, and so their thoughts turned to
you as their leader. But we had hoped that you would bring a hundred men
with you.�

�They are already at Dax, where we shall join them,� said Sir Nigel.
�But let the men break their fast, and we shall then take counsel what
to do.�

�Come into my hut,� said Sir Claude. �It is but poor fare that I can lay
before you--milk, cheese, wine, and bacon--yet your squire and yourself
will doubtless excuse it. This is my house where the pennon flies before
the door--a small residence to contain the Lord of Montchateau.�

Sir Nigel sat silent and distrait at his meal, while Alleyne hearkened
to the clattering tongue of the Gascon, and to his talk of the glories
of his own estate, his successes in love, and his triumphs in war.

�And now that you are here, Sir Nigel,� he said at last, �I have many
fine ventures all ready for us. I have heard that Montpezat is of no
great strength, and that there are two hundred thousand crowns in the
castle. At Castelnau also there is a cobbler who is in my pay, and who
will throw us a rope any dark night from his house by the town wall. I
promise you that you shall thrust your arms elbow-deep among good silver
pieces ere the nights are moonless again; for on every hand of us are
fair women, rich wine, and good plunder, as much as heart could wish.�

�I have other plans,� answered Sir Nigel curtly; �for I have come hither
to lead these bowmen to the help of the prince, our master, who may have
sore need of them ere he set Pedro upon the throne of Spain. It is my
purpose to start this very day for Dax upon the Adour, where he hath now
pitched his camp.�

The face of the Gascon darkened, and his eyes flashed with resentment.
�For me,� he said, �I care little for this war, and I find the life
which I lead a very joyous and pleasant one. I will not go to Dax.�

�Nay, think again, Sir Claude,� said Sir Nigel gently; �for you have
ever had the name of a true and loyal knight. Surely you will not hold
back now when your master hath need of you.�

�I will not go to Dax,� the other shouted.

�But your devoir--your oath of fealty?�

�I say that I will not go.�

�Then, Sir Claude, I must lead the Company without you.�

�If they will follow,� cried the Gascon with a sneer. �These are not
hired slaves, but free companions, who will do nothing save by their own
good wills. In very sooth, my Lord Loring, they are ill men to trifle
with, and it were easier to pluck a bone from a hungry bear than to lead
a bowman out of a land of plenty and of pleasure.�

�Then I pray you to gather them together,� said Sir Nigel, �and I will
tell them what is in my mind; for if I am their leader they must to Dax,
and if I am not then I know not what I am doing in Auvergne. Have my
horse ready, Alleyne; for, by St. Paul! come what may, I must be upon
the homeward road ere mid-day.�

A blast upon the bugle summoned the bowmen to counsel, and they gathered
in little knots and groups around a great fallen tree which lay athwart
the glade. Sir Nigel sprang lightly upon the trunk, and stood with
blinking eye and firm lips looking down at the ring of upturned warlike
faces.

�They tell me, bowmen,� said he, �that ye have grown so fond of ease and
plunder and high living that ye are not to be moved from this pleasant
country. But, by Saint Paul! I will believe no such thing of you, for
I can readily see that you are all very valiant men, who would scorn to
live here in peace when your prince hath so great a venture before him.
Ye have chosen me as a leader, and a leader I will be if ye come with
me to Spain; and I vow to you that my pennon of the five roses shall, if
God give me strength and life, be ever where there is most honor to
be gained. But if it be your wish to loll and loiter in these glades,
bartering glory and renown for vile gold and ill-gotten riches, then
ye must find another leader; for I have lived in honor, and in honor I
trust that I shall die. If there be forest men or Hampshire men amongst
ye, I call upon them to say whether they will follow the banner of
Loring.�

�Here's a Romsey man for you!� cried a young bowman with a sprig of
evergreen set in his helmet.

�And a lad from Alresford!� shouted another.

�And from Milton!�

�And from Burley!�

�And from Lymington!�

�And a little one from Brockenhurst!� shouted a huge-limbed fellow who
sprawled beneath a tree.

�By my hilt! lads,� cried Aylward, jumping upon the fallen trunk, �I
think that we could not look the girls in the eyes if we let the prince
cross the mountains and did not pull string to clear a path for him.
It is very well in time of peace to lead such a life as we have had
together, but now the war-banner is in the wind once more, and, by these
ten finger-bones! if he go alone, old Samkin Aylward will walk beside
it.�

These words from a man as popular as Aylward decided many of the
waverers, and a shout of approval burst from his audience.

�Far be it from me,� said Sir Claude Latour suavely, �to persuade you
against this worthy archer, or against Sir Nigel Loring; yet we have
been together in many ventures, and perchance it may not be amiss if I
say to you what I think upon the matter.�

�Peace for the little Gascon!� cried the archers. �Let every man have
his word. Shoot straight for the mark, lad, and fair play for all.�

�Bethink you, then,� said Sir Claude, �that you go under a hard rule,
with neither freedom nor pleasure--and for what? For sixpence a day,
at the most; while now you may walk across the country and stretch out
either hand to gather in whatever you have a mind for. What do we not
hear of our comrades who have gone with Sir John Hawkwood to Italy? In
one night they have held to ransom six hundred of the richest noblemen
of Mantua. They camp before a great city, and the base burghers come
forth with the keys, and then they make great spoil; or, if it please
them better, they take so many horse-loads of silver as a composition;
and so they journey on from state to state, rich and free and feared by
all. Now, is not that the proper life for a soldier?�

�The proper life for a robber!� roared Hordle John, in his thundering
voice.

�And yet there is much in what the Gascon says,� said a swarthy fellow
in a weather-stained doublet; �and I for one would rather prosper in
Italy than starve in Spain.�

�You were always a cur and a traitor, Mark Shaw,� cried Aylward. �By
my hilt! if you will stand forth and draw your sword I will warrant you
that you will see neither one nor the other.�

�Nay, Aylward,� said Sir Nigel, �we cannot mend the matter by broiling.
Sir Claude, I think that what you have said does you little honor, and
if my words aggrieve you I am ever ready to go deeper into the matter
with you. But you shall have such men as will follow you, and you may
go where you will, so that you come not with us. Let all who love
their prince and country stand fast, while those who think more of a
well-lined purse step forth upon the farther side.�

Thirteen bowmen, with hung heads and sheepish faces, stepped forward
with Mark Shaw and ranged themselves behind Sir Claude. Amid the
hootings and hissings of their comrades, they marched off together to
the Gascon's hut, while the main body broke up their meeting and set
cheerily to work packing their possessions, furbishing their weapons,
and preparing for the march which lay before them. Over the Tarn and the
Garonne, through the vast quagmires of Armagnac, past the swift-flowing
Losse, and so down the long valley of the Adour, there was many a
long league to be crossed ere they could join themselves to that dark
war-cloud which was drifting slowly southwards to the line of the snowy
peaks, beyond which the banner of England had never yet been seen.



CHAPTER XXXIII. HOW THE ARMY MADE THE PASSAGE OF RONCESVALLES.


The whole vast plain of Gascony and of Languedoc is an arid and
profitless expanse in winter save where the swift-flowing Adour and her
snow-fed tributaries, the Louts, the Oloron and the Pau, run down to
the sea of Biscay. South of the Adour the jagged line of mountains which
fringe the sky-line send out long granite claws, running down into the
lowlands and dividing them into �gaves� or stretches of valley. Hillocks
grow into hills, and hills into mountains, each range overlying its
neighbor, until they soar up in the giant chain which raises its
spotless and untrodden peaks, white and dazzling, against the pale blue
wintry sky.

A quiet land is this--a land where the slow-moving Basque, with his flat
biretta-cap, his red sash and his hempen sandals, tills his scanty farm
or drives his lean flock to their hill-side pastures. It is the country
of the wolf and the isard, of the brown bear and the mountain-goat, a
land of bare rock and of rushing water. Yet here it was that the will of
a great prince had now assembled a gallant army; so that from the Adour
to the passes of Navarre the barren valleys and wind-swept wastes were
populous with soldiers and loud with the shouting of orders and the
neighing of horses. For the banners of war had been flung to the wind
once more, and over those glistening peaks was the highway along which
Honor pointed in an age when men had chosen her as their guide.

And now all was ready for the enterprise. From Dax to St. Jean
Pied-du-Port the country was mottled with the white tents of Gascons,
Aquitanians and English, all eager for the advance. From all sides the
free companions had trooped in, until not less than twelve thousand of
these veteran troops were cantoned along the frontiers of Navarre. From
England had arrived the prince's brother, the Duke of Lancaster, with
four hundred knights in his train and a strong company of archers. Above
all, an heir to the throne had been born in Bordeaux, and the prince
might leave his spouse with an easy mind, for all was well with mother
and with child.

The keys of the mountain passes still lay in the hands of the shifty and
ignoble Charles of Navarre, who had chaffered and bargained both with
the English and with the Spanish, taking money from the one side to hold
them open and from the other to keep them sealed. The mallet hand of
Edward, however, had shattered all the schemes and wiles of the plotter.
Neither entreaty nor courtly remonstrance came from the English prince;
but Sir Hugh Calverley passed silently over the border with his company,
and the blazing walls of the two cities of Miranda and Puenta de la
Reyna warned the unfaithful monarch that there were other metals besides
gold, and that he was dealing with a man to whom it was unsafe to lie.
His price was paid, his objections silenced, and the mountain gorges lay
open to the invaders. From the Feast of the Epiphany there was mustering
and massing, until, in the first week of February--three days after the
White Company joined the army--the word was given for a general advance
through the defile of Roncesvalles. At five in the cold winter's morning
the bugles were blowing in the hamlet of St. Jean Pied-du-Port, and by
six Sir Nigel's Company, three hundred strong, were on their way for the
defile, pushing swiftly in the dim light up the steep curving road; for
it was the prince's order that they should be the first to pass through,
and that they should remain on guard at the further end until the whole
army had emerged from the mountains. Day was already breaking in the
east, and the summits of the great peaks had turned rosy red, while the
valleys still lay in the shadow, when they found themselves with the
cliffs on either hand and the long, rugged pass stretching away before
them.

Sir Nigel rode his great black war-horse at the head of his archers,
dressed in full armor, with Black Simon bearing his banner behind him,
while Alleyne at his bridle-arm carried his blazoned shield and his
well-steeled ashen spear. A proud and happy man was the knight, and many
a time he turned in his saddle to look at the long column of bowmen who
swung swiftly along behind him.

�By Saint Paul! Alleyne,� said he, �this pass is a very perilous place,
and I would that the King of Navarre had held it against us, for it
would have been a very honorable venture had it fallen to us to win a
passage. I have heard the minstrels sing of one Sir Roland who was slain
by the infidels in these very parts.�

�If it please you, my fair lord,� said Black Simon, �I know something
of these parts, for I have twice served a term with the King of Navarre.
There is a hospice of monks yonder, where you may see the roof among the
trees, and there it was that Sir Roland was slain. The village upon the
left is Orbaiceta, and I know a house therein where the right wine of
Jurancon is to be bought, if it would please you to quaff a morning
cup.�

�There is smoke yonder upon the right.�

�That is a village named Les Aldudes, and I know a hostel there also
where the wine is of the best. It is said that the inn-keeper hath a
buried treasure, and I doubt not, my fair lord, that if you grant me
leave I could prevail upon him to tell us where he hath hid it.�

�Nay, nay, Simon,� said Sir Nigel curtly, �I pray you to forget these
free companion tricks. Ha! Edricson, I see that you stare about you, and
in good sooth these mountains must seem wondrous indeed to one who hath
but seen Butser or the Portsdown hill.�

The broken and rugged road had wound along the crests of low hills,
with wooded ridges on either side of it over which peeped the loftier
mountains, the distant Peak of the South and the vast Altabisca, which
towered high above them and cast its black shadow from left to right
across the valley. From where they now stood they could look forward
down a long vista of beech woods and jagged rock-strewn wilderness, all
white with snow, to where the pass opened out upon the uplands beyond.
Behind them they could still catch a glimpse of the gray plains of
Gascony, and could see her rivers gleaming like coils of silver in the
sunshine. As far as eye could see from among the rocky gorges and the
bristles of the pine woods there came the quick twinkle and glitter of
steel, while the wind brought with it sudden distant bursts of martial
music from the great host which rolled by every road and by-path towards
the narrow pass of Roncesvalles. On the cliffs on either side might also
be seen the flash of arms and the waving of pennons where the force of
Navarre looked down upon the army of strangers who passed through their
territories.

�By Saint Paul!� said Sir Nigel, blinking up at them, �I think that
we have much to hope for from these cavaliers, for they cluster very
thickly upon our flanks. Pass word to the men, Aylward, that they
unsling their bows, for I have no doubt that there are some very
worthy gentlemen yonder who may give us some opportunity for honorable
advancement.�

�I hear that the prince hath the King of Navarre as hostage,� said
Alleyne, �and it is said that he hath sworn to put him to death if there
be any attack upon us.�

�It was not so that war was made when good King Edward first turned his
hand to it,� said Sir Nigel sadly. �Ah! Alleyne, I fear that you will
never live to see such things, for the minds of men are more set upon
money and gain than of old. By Saint Paul! it was a noble sight when two
great armies would draw together upon a certain day, and all who had
a vow would ride forth to discharge themselves of it. What noble
spear-runnings have I not seen, and even in an humble way had a part in,
when cavaliers would run a course for the easing of their souls and for
the love of their ladies! Never a bad word have I for the French, for,
though I have ridden twenty times up to their array, I have never yet
failed to find some very gentle and worthy knight or squire who was
willing to do what he might to enable me to attempt some small feat of
arms. Then, when all cavaliers had been satisfied, the two armies would
come to hand-strokes, and fight right merrily until one or other had the
vantage. By Saint Paul! it was not our wont in those days to pay gold
for the opening of passes, nor would we hold a king as hostage lest
his people come to thrusts with us. In good sooth, if the war is to be
carried out in such a fashion, then it is grief to me that I ever came
away from Castle Twynham, for I would not have left my sweet lady had I
not thought that there were deeds of arms to be done.�

�But surely, my fair lord,� said Alleyne, �you have done some great
feats of arms since we left the Lady Loring.�

�I cannot call any to mind,� answered Sir Nigel.

�There was the taking of the sea-rovers, and the holding of the keep
against the Jacks.�

�Nay, nay,� said the knight, �these were not feats of arms, but mere
wayside ventures and the chances of travel. By Saint Paul! if it were
not that these hills are over-steep for Pommers, I would ride to these
cavaliers of Navarre and see if there were not some among them who would
help me to take this patch from mine eye. It is a sad sight to see this
very fine pass, which my own Company here could hold against an army,
and yet to ride through it with as little profit as though it were the
lane from my kennels to the Avon.�

All morning Sir Nigel rode in a very ill-humor, with his Company
tramping behind him. It was a toilsome march over broken ground and
through snow, which came often as high as the knee, yet ere the sun had
begun to sink they had reached the spot where the gorge opens out on to
the uplands of Navarre, and could see the towers of Pampeluna jutting
up against the southern sky-line. Here the Company were quartered in a
scattered mountain hamlet, and Alleyne spent the day looking down
upon the swarming army which poured with gleam of spears and flaunt of
standards through the narrow pass.

�Hola, mon gar.,� said Aylward, seating himself upon a boulder by his
side. �This is indeed a fine sight upon which it is good to look, and a
man might go far ere he would see so many brave men and fine horses.
By my hilt! our little lord is wroth because we have come peacefully
through the passes, but I will warrant him that we have fighting
enow ere we turn our faces northward again. It is said that there are
four-score thousand men behind the King of Spain, with Du Guesclin and
all the best lances of France, who have sworn to shed their heart's
blood ere this Pedro come again to the throne.�

�Yet our own army is a great one,� said Alleyne.

�Nay, there are but seven-and-twenty thousand men. Chandos hath
persuaded the prince to leave many behind, and indeed I think that he is
right, for there is little food and less water in these parts for which
we are bound. A man without his meat or a horse without his fodder is
like a wet bow-string, fit for little. But voila, mon petit, here comes
Chandos and his company, and there is many a pensil and banderole among
yonder squadrons which show that the best blood of England is riding
under his banners.�

Whilst Aylward had been speaking, a strong column of archers had defiled
through the pass beneath them. They were followed by a banner-bearer
who held high the scarlet wedge upon a silver field which proclaimed the
presence of the famous warrior. He rode himself within a spear's-length
of his standard, clad from neck to foot in steel, but draped in the long
linen gown or parement which was destined to be the cause of his death.
His plumed helmet was carried behind him by his body-squire, and his
head was covered by a small purple cap, from under which his snow-white
hair curled downwards to his shoulders. With his long beak-like nose and
his single gleaming eye, which shone brightly from under a thick tuft
of grizzled brow, he seemed to Alleyne to have something of the look
of some fierce old bird of prey. For a moment he smiled, as his eye lit
upon the banner of the five roses waving from the hamlet; but his course
lay for Pampeluna, and he rode on after the archers.

Close at his heels came sixteen squires, all chosen from the highest
families, and behind them rode twelve hundred English knights, with
gleam of steel and tossing of plumes, their harness jingling, their long
straight swords clanking against their stirrup-irons, and the beat of
their chargers' hoofs like the low deep roar of the sea upon the shore.
Behind them marched six hundred Cheshire and Lancashire archers, bearing
the badge of the Audleys, followed by the famous Lord Audley himself,
with the four valiant squires, Dutton of Dutton, Delves of Doddington,
Fowlehurst of Crewe, and Hawkestone of Wainehill, who had all won such
glory at Poictiers. Two hundred heavily-armed cavalry rode behind the
Audley standard, while close at their heels came the Duke of Lancaster
with a glittering train, heralds tabarded with the royal arms riding
three deep upon cream-colored chargers in front of him. On either side
of the young prince rode the two seneschals of Aquitaine, Sir Guiscard
d'Angle and Sir Stephen Cossington, the one bearing the banner of the
province and the other that of Saint George. Away behind him as far as
eye could reach rolled the far-stretching, unbroken river of steel--rank
after rank and column after column, with waving of plumes, glitter of
arms, tossing of guidons, and flash and flutter of countless armorial
devices. All day Alleyne looked down upon the changing scene, and all
day the old bowman stood by his elbow, pointing out the crests of famous
warriors and the arms of noble houses. Here were the gold mullets of the
Pakingtons, the sable and ermine of the Mackworths, the scarlet bars of
the Wakes, the gold and blue of the Grosvenors, the cinque-foils of
the Cliftons, the annulets of the Musgraves, the silver pinions of the
Beauchamps, the crosses of the Molineaux, the bloody chevron of the
Woodhouses, the red and silver of the Worsleys, the swords of the
Clarks, the boars'-heads of the Lucies, the crescents of the Boyntons,
and the wolf and dagger of the Lipscombs. So through the sunny winter
day the chivalry of England poured down through the dark pass of
Roncesvalles to the plains of Spain.

It was on a Monday that the Duke of Lancaster's division passed safely
through the Pyrenees. On the Tuesday there was a bitter frost, and the
ground rung like iron beneath the feet of the horses; yet ere evening
the prince himself, with the main battle of his army, had passed the
gorge and united with his vanguard at Pampeluna. With him rode the King
of Majorca, the hostage King of Navarre, and the fierce Don Pedro of
Spain, whose pale blue eyes gleamed with a sinister light as they rested
once more upon the distant peaks of the land which had disowned him.
Under the royal banners rode many a bold Gascon baron and many a
hot-blooded islander. Here were the high stewards of Aquitaine, of
Saintonge, of La Rochelle, of Quercy, of Limousin, of Agenois, of
Poitou, and of Bigorre, with the banners and musters of their provinces.
Here also were the valiant Earl of Angus, Sir Thomas Banaster with his
garter over his greave, Sir Nele Loring, second cousin to Sir Nigel,
and a long column of Welsh footmen who marched under the red banner
of Merlin. From dawn to sundown the long train wound through the pass,
their breath reeking up upon the frosty air like the steam from a
cauldron.

The weather was less keen upon the Wednesday, and the rear-guard
made good their passage, with the bombards and the wagon-train. Free
companions and Gascons made up this portion of the army to the number of
ten thousand men. The fierce Sir Hugh Calverley, with his yellow mane,
and the rugged Sir Robert Knolles, with their war-hardened and veteran
companies of English bowmen, headed the long column; while behind them
came the turbulent bands of the Bastard of Breteuil, Nandon de Bagerant,
one-eyed Camus, Black Ortingo, La Nuit and others whose very names seem
to smack of hard hands and ruthless deeds. With them also were the
pick of the Gascon chivalry--the old Duc d'Armagnac, his nephew Lord
d'Albret, brooding and scowling over his wrongs, the giant Oliver de
Clisson, the Captal de Buch, pink of knighthood, the sprightly Sir
Perducas d'Albret, the red-bearded Lord d'Esparre, and a long train of
needy and grasping border nobles, with long pedigrees and short purses,
who had come down from their hill-side strongholds, all hungering for
the spoils and the ransoms of Spain. By the Thursday morning the whole
army was encamped in the Vale of Pampeluna, and the prince had called
his council to meet him in the old palace of the ancient city of
Navarre.



CHAPTER XXXIV. HOW THE COMPANY MADE SPORT IN THE VALE OF PAMPELUNA.


Whilst the council was sitting in Pampeluna the White Company, having
encamped in a neighboring valley, close to the companies of La Nuit and
of Black Ortingo, were amusing themselves with sword-play, wrestling,
and shooting at the shields, which they had placed upon the hillside
to serve them as butts. The younger archers, with their coats of mail
thrown aside, their brown or flaxen hair tossing in the wind, and their
jerkins turned back to give free play to their brawny chests and arms,
stood in lines, each loosing his shaft in turn, while Johnston, Aylward,
Black Simon, and half-a-score of the elders lounged up and down with
critical eyes, and a word of rough praise or of curt censure for the
marksmen. Behind stood knots of Gascon and Brabant crossbowmen from
the companies of Ortingo and of La Nuit, leaning upon their unsightly
weapons and watching the practice of the Englishmen.

�A good shot, Hewett, a good shot!� said old Johnston to a young bowman,
who stood with his bow in his left hand, gazing with parted lips after
his flying shaft. �You see, she finds the ring, as I knew she would from
the moment that your string twanged.�

�Loose it easy, steady, and yet sharp,� said Aylward. �By my hilt! mon
gar., it is very well when you do but shoot at a shield, but when there
is a man behind the shield, and he rides at you with wave of sword and
glint of eyes from behind his vizor, you may find him a less easy mark.�

�It is a mark that I have found before now,� answered the young bowman.

�And shall again, camarade, I doubt not. But hola! Johnston, who is this
who holds his bow like a crow-keeper?�

�It is Silas Peterson, of Horsham. Do not wink with one eye and look
with the other, Silas, and do not hop and dance after you shoot, with
your tongue out, for that will not speed it upon its way. Stand straight
and firm, as God made you. Move not the bow arm, and steady with the
drawing hand!�

�I' faith,� said Black Simon, �I am a spearman myself, and am more
fitted for hand-strokes than for such work as this. Yet I have spent my
days among bowmen, and I have seen many a brave shaft sped. I will not
say but that we have some good marksmen here, and that this Company
would be accounted a fine body of archers at any time or place. Yet I
do not see any men who bend so strong a bow or shoot as true a shaft as
those whom I have known.�

�You say sooth,� said Johnston, turning his seamed and grizzled face
upon the man-at-arms. �See yonder,� he added, pointing to a bombard
which lay within the camp: �there is what hath done scath to good
bowmanship, with its filthy soot and foolish roaring mouth. I wonder
that a true knight, like our prince, should carry such a scurvy thing in
his train. Robin, thou red-headed lurden, how oft must I tell thee not
to shoot straight with a quarter-wind blowing across the mark?�

�By these ten finger-bones! there were some fine bowmen at the intaking
of Calais,� said Aylward. �I well remember that, on occasion of an
outfall, a Genoan raised his arm over his mantlet, and shook it at us, a
hundred paces from our line. There were twenty who loosed shafts at him,
and when the man was afterwards slain it was found that he had taken
eighteen through his forearm.�

�And I can call to mind,� remarked Johnston, �that when the great
cog 'Christopher,' which the French had taken from us, was moored two
hundred paces from the shore, two archers, little Robin Withstaff and
Elias Baddlesmere, in four shots each cut every strand of her hempen
anchor-cord, so that she well-nigh came upon the rocks.�

�Good shooting, i' faith rare shooting!� said Black Simon. �But I have
seen you, Johnston, and you, Samkin Aylward, and one or two others who
are still with us, shoot as well as the best. Was it not you, Johnston,
who took the fat ox at Finsbury butts against the pick of London town?�

A sunburnt and black-eyed Brabanter had stood near the old archers,
leaning upon a large crossbow and listening to their talk, which had
been carried on in that hybrid camp dialect which both nations could
understand. He was a squat, bull-necked man, clad in the iron helmet,
mail tunic, and woollen gambesson of his class. A jacket with hanging
sleeves, slashed with velvet at the neck and wrists, showed that he was
a man of some consideration, an under-officer, or file-leader of his
company.

�I cannot think,� said he, �why you English should be so fond of your
six-foot stick. If it amuse you to bend it, well and good; but why
should I strain and pull, when my little moulinet will do all for me,
and better than I can do it for myself?�

�I have seen good shooting with the prod and with the latch,� said
Aylward, �but, by my hilt! camarade, with all respect to you and to your
bow, I think that is but a woman's weapon, which a woman can point and
loose as easily as a man.�

�I know not about that,� answered the Brabanter, �but this I know,
that though I have served for fourteen years, I have never yet seen an
Englishman do aught with the long-bow which I could not do better with
my arbalest. By the three kings! I would even go further, and say that I
have done things with my arbalest which no Englishman could do with his
long-bow.�

�Well said, mon gar.,� cried Aylward. �A good cock has ever a brave
call. Now, I have shot little of late, but there is Johnston here who
will try a round with you for the honor of the Company.�

�And I will lay a gallon of Jurancon wine upon the long-bow,� said Black
Simon, �though I had rather, for my own drinking, that it were a quart
of Twynham ale.�

�I take both your challenge and your wager,� said the man of Brabant,
throwing off his jacket and glancing keenly about him with his black,
twinkling eyes. �I cannot see any fitting mark, for I care not to waste
a bolt upon these shields, which a drunken boor could not miss at a
village kermesse.�

�This is a perilous man,� whispered an English man-at-arms, plucking at
Aylward's sleeve. �He is the best marksman of all the crossbow companies
and it was he who brought down the Constable de Bourbon at Brignais. I
fear that your man will come by little honor with him.�

�Yet I have seen Johnston shoot these twenty years, and I will not
flinch from it. How say you, old war-hound, will you not have a flight
shot or two with this springald?�

�Tut, tut, Aylward,� said the old bowman. �My day is past, and it is
for the younger ones to hold what we have gained. I take it unkindly of
thee, Samkin, that thou shouldst call all eyes thus upon a broken bowman
who could once shoot a fair shaft. Let me feel that bow, Wilkins! It is
a Scotch bow, I see, for the upper nock is without and the lower within.
By the black rood! it is a good piece of yew, well nocked, well strung,
well waxed, and very joyful to the feel. I think even now that I might
hit any large and goodly mark with a bow like this. Turn thy quiver to
me, Aylward. I love an ash arrow pierced with cornel-wood for a roving
shaft.�

�By my hilt! and so do I,� cried Aylward. �These three gander-winged
shafts are such.�

�So I see, comrade. It has been my wont to choose a saddle-backed
feather for a dead shaft, and a swine-backed for a smooth flier. I will
take the two of them. Ah! Samkin, lad, the eye grows dim and the hand
less firm as the years pass.�

�Come then, are you not ready?� said the Brabanter, who had watched
with ill-concealed impatience the slow and methodic movements of his
antagonist.

�I will venture a rover with you, or try long-butts or hoyles,� said old
Johnston. �To my mind the long-bow is a better weapon than the arbalest,
but it may be ill for me to prove it.�

�So I think,� quoth the other with a sneer. He drew his moulinet from
his girdle, and fixing it to the windlass, he drew back the powerful
double cord until it had clicked into the catch. Then from his quiver he
drew a short, thick quarrel, which he placed with the utmost care upon
the groove. Word had spread of what was going forward, and the rivals
were already surrounded, not only by the English archers of the Company,
but by hundreds of arbalestiers and men-at-arms from the bands of
Ortingo and La Nuit, to the latter of which the Brabanter belonged.

�There is a mark yonder on the hill,� said he; �mayhap you can discern
it.�

�I see something,� answered Johnston, shading his eyes with his hand;
�but it is a very long shoot.�

�A fair shoot--a fair shoot! Stand aside, Arnaud, lest you find a bolt
through your gizzard. Now, comrade, I take no flight shot, and I give
you the vantage of watching my shaft.�

As he spoke he raised his arbalest to his shoulder and was about to pull
the trigger, when a large gray stork flapped heavily into view skimming
over the brow of the hill, and then soaring up into the air to pass the
valley. Its shrill and piercing cries drew all eyes upon it, and, as it
came nearer, a dark spot which circled above it resolved itself into a
peregrine falcon, which hovered over its head, poising itself from time
to time, and watching its chance of closing with its clumsy quarry.
Nearer and nearer came the two birds, all absorbed in their own contest,
the stork wheeling upwards, the hawk still fluttering above it, until
they were not a hundred paces from the camp. The Brabanter raised his
weapon to the sky, and there came the short, deep twang of his powerful
string. His bolt struck the stork just where its wing meets the body,
and the bird whirled aloft in a last convulsive flutter before falling
wounded and flapping to the earth. A roar of applause burst from the
crossbowmen; but at the instant that the bolt struck its mark old
Johnston, who had stood listlessly with arrow on string, bent his bow
and sped a shaft through the body of the falcon. Whipping the other from
his belt, he sent it skimming some few feet from the earth with so true
an aim that it struck and transfixed the stork for the second time ere
it could reach the ground. A deep-chested shout of delight burst from
the archers at the sight of this double feat, and Aylward, dancing with
joy, threw his arms round the old marksman and embraced him with such
vigor that their mail tunics clanged again.

�Ah! camarade,� he cried, �you shall have a stoup with me for this! What
then, old dog, would not the hawk please thee, but thou must have the
stork as well. Oh, to my heart again!�

�It is a pretty piece of yew, and well strung,� said Johnston with a
twinkle in his deep-set gray eyes. �Even an old broken bowman might find
the clout with a bow like this.�

�You have done very well,� remarked the Brabanter in a surly voice.
�But it seems to me that you have not yet shown yourself to be a better
marksman than I, for I have struck that at which I aimed, and, by the
three kings! no man can do more.�

�It would ill beseem me to claim to be a better marksman,� answered
Johnston, �for I have heard great things of your skill. I did but wish
to show that the long-bow could do that which an arbalest could not do,
for you could not with your moulinet have your string ready to speed
another shaft ere the bird drop to the earth.�

�In that you have vantage,� said the crossbowman. �By Saint James! it
is now my turn to show you where my weapon has the better of you. I pray
you to draw a flight shaft with all your strength down the valley, that
we may see the length of your shoot.�

�That is a very strong prod of yours,� said Johnston, shaking his
grizzled head as he glanced at the thick arch and powerful strings of
his rival's arbalest. �I have little doubt that you can overshoot me,
and yet I have seen bowmen who could send a cloth-yard arrow further
than you could speed a quarrel.�

�So I have heard,� remarked the Brabanter; �and yet it is a strange
thing that these wondrous bowmen are never where I chance to be. Pace
out the distances with a wand at every five score, and do you, Arnaud,
stand at the fifth wand to carry back my bolts to me.�

A line was measured down the valley, and Johnston, drawing an arrow to
the very head, sent it whistling over the row of wands.

�Bravely drawn! A rare shoot!� shouted the bystanders.

�It is well up to the fourth mark.�

�By my hilt! it is over it,� cried Aylward. �I can see where they have
stooped to gather up the shaft.�

�We shall hear anon,� said Johnston quietly, and presently a young
archer came running to say that the arrow had fallen twenty paces beyond
the fourth wand.

�Four hundred paces and a score,� cried Black Simon. �I' faith, it is a
very long flight. Yet wood and steel may do more than flesh and blood.�

The Brabanter stepped forward with a smile of conscious triumph, and
loosed the cord of his weapon. A shout burst from his comrades as they
watched the swift and lofty flight of the heavy bolt.

�Over the fourth!� groaned Aylward. �By my hilt! I think that it is well
up to the fifth.�

�It is over the fifth!� cried a Gascon loudly, and a comrade came
running with waving arms to say that the bolt had pitched eight paces
beyond the mark of the five hundred.

�Which weapon hath the vantage now?� cried the Brabanter, strutting
proudly about with shouldered arbalest, amid the applause of his
companions.

�You can overshoot me,� said Johnston gently.

�Or any other man who ever bent a long-bow,� cried his victorious
adversary.

�Nay, not so fast,� said a huge archer, whose mighty shoulders and red
head towered high above the throng of his comrades. �I must have a word
with you ere you crow so loudly. Where is my little popper? By sainted
Dick of Hampole! it will be a strange thing if I cannot outshoot that
thing of thine, which to my eyes is more like a rat-trap than a bow.
Will you try another flight, or do you stand by your last?�

�Five hundred and eight paces will serve my turn,� answered the
Brabanter, looking askance at this new opponent.

�Tut, John,� whispered Aylward, �you never were a marksman. Why must you
thrust your spoon into this dish?�

�Easy and slow, Aylward. There are very many things which I cannot do,
but there are also one or two which I have the trick of. It is in my
mind that I can beat this shoot, if my bow will but hold together.�

�Go on, old babe of the woods!� �Have at it, Hampshire!� cried the
archers laughing.

�By my soul! you may grin,� cried John. �But I learned how to make the
long shoot from old Hob Miller of Milford.� He took up a great black
bow, as he spoke, and sitting down upon the ground he placed his two
feet on either end of the stave. With an arrow fitted, he then pulled
the string towards him with both hands until the head of the shaft was
level with the wood. The great bow creaked and groaned and the cord
vibrated with the tension.

�Who is this fool's-head who stands in the way of my shoot?� said he,
craning up his neck from the ground.

�He stands on the further side of my mark,� answered the Brabanter, �so
he has little to fear from you.�

�Well, the saints assoil him!� cried John. �Though I think he is
over-near to be scathed.� As he spoke he raised his two feet, with the
bow-stave upon their soles, and his cord twanged with a deep rich hum
which might be heard across the valley. The measurer in the distance
fell flat upon his face, and then jumping up again, he began to run in
the opposite direction.

�Well shot, old lad! It is indeed over his head,� cried the bowmen.

�Mon Dieu!� exclaimed the Brabanter, �who ever saw such a shoot?�

�It is but a trick,� quoth John. �Many a time have I won a gallon of ale
by covering a mile in three flights down Wilverley Chase.�

�It fell a hundred and thirty paces beyond the fifth mark,� shouted an
archer in the distance.

�Six hundred and thirty paces! Mon Dieu! but that is a shoot! And yet it
says nothing for your weapon, mon gros camarade, for it was by turning
yourself into a crossbow that you did it.�

�By my hilt! there is truth in that,� cried Aylward. �And now, friend,
I will myself show you a vantage of the long-bow. I pray you to speed
a bolt against yonder shield with all your force. It is an inch of elm
with bull's hide over it.�

�I scarce shot as many shafts at Brignais,� growled the man of Brabant;
�though I found a better mark there than a cantle of bull's hide. But
what is this, Englishman? The shield hangs not one hundred paces from
me, and a blind man could strike it.� He screwed up his string to the
furthest pitch, and shot his quarrel at the dangling shield. Aylward,
who had drawn an arrow from his quiver, carefully greased the head of
it, and sped it at the same mark.

�Run, Wilkins,� quoth he, �and fetch me the shield.�

Long were the faces of the Englishmen and broad the laugh of the
crossbowmen as the heavy mantlet was carried towards them, for there in
the centre was the thick Brabant bolt driven deeply into the wood, while
there was neither sign nor trace of the cloth-yard shaft.

�By the three kings!� cried the Brabanter, �this time at least there is
no gainsaying which is the better weapon, or which the truer hand that
held it. You have missed the shield, Englishman.�

�Tarry a bit! tarry a bit, mon gar.!� quoth Aylward, and turning round
the shield he showed a round clear hole in the wood at the back of it.
�My shaft has passed through it, camarade, and I trow the one which goes
through is more to be feared than that which bides on the way.�

The Brabanter stamped his foot with mortification, and was about to make
some angry reply, when Alleyne Edricson came riding up to the crowds of
archers.

�Sir Nigel will be here anon,� said he, �and it is his wish to speak
with the Company.�

In an instant order and method took the place of general confusion.
Bows, steel caps, and jacks were caught up from the grass. A long cordon
cleared the camp of all strangers, while the main body fell into four
lines with under-officers and file-leaders in front and on either flank.
So they stood, silent and motionless, when their leader came riding
towards them, his face shining and his whole small figure swelling with
the news which he bore.

�Great honor has been done to us, men,� cried he: �for, of all the army,
the prince has chosen us out that we should ride onwards into the lands
of Spain to spy upon our enemies. Yet, as there are many of us, and as
the service may not be to the liking of all, I pray that those will step
forward from the ranks who have the will to follow me.�

There was a rustle among the bowmen, but when Sir Nigel looked up at
them no man stood forward from his fellows, but the four lines of men
stretched unbroken as before. Sir Nigel blinked at them in amazement,
and a look of the deepest sorrow shadowed his face.

�That I should live to see the day!� he cried. �What! not one----�

�My fair lord,� whispered Alleyne, �they have all stepped forward.�

�Ah, by Saint Paul! I see how it is with them. I could not think that
they would desert me. We start at dawn to-morrow, and ye are to have
the horses of Sir Robert Cheney's company. Be ready, I pray ye, at early
cock-crow.�

A buzz of delight burst from the archers, as they broke their ranks and
ran hither and thither, whooping and cheering like boys who have news of
a holiday. Sir Nigel gazed after them with a smiling face, when a heavy
hand fell upon his shoulder.

�What ho! my knight-errant of Twynham!� said a voice, �You are off to
Ebro, I hear; and, by the holy fish of Tobias! you must take me under
your banner.�

�What! Sir Oliver Buttesthorn!� cried Sir Nigel. �I had heard that you
were come into camp, and had hoped to see you. Glad and proud shall I be
to have you with me.�

�I have a most particular and weighty reason for wishing to go,� said
the sturdy knight.

�I can well believe it,� returned Sir Nigel; �I have met no man who is
quicker to follow where honor leads.�

�Nay, it is not for honor that I go, Nigel.�

�For what then?�

�For pullets.�

�Pullets?�

�Yes, for the rascal vanguard have cleared every hen from the
country-side. It was this very morning that Norbury, my squire,
lamed his horse in riding round in quest of one, for we have a bag of
truffles, and nought to eat with them. Never have I seen such locusts as
this vanguard of ours. Not a pullet shall we see until we are in front
of them; so I shall leave my Winchester runagates to the care of the
provost-marshal, and I shall hie south with you, Nigel, with my truffles
at my saddle-bow.�

�Oliver, Oliver, I know you over-well,� said Sir Nigel, shaking his
head, and the two old soldiers rode off together to their pavilion.



CHAPTER XXXV. HOW SIR NIGEL HAWKED AT AN EAGLE.


To the south of Pampeluna in the kingdom of Navarre there stretched
a high table-land, rising into bare, sterile hills, brown or gray in
color, and strewn with huge boulders of granite. On the Gascon side of
the great mountains there had been running streams, meadows, forests,
and little nestling villages. Here, on the contrary, were nothing but
naked rocks, poor pasture, and savage, stone-strewn wastes. Gloomy
defiles or barrancas intersected this wild country with mountain
torrents dashing and foaming between their rugged sides. The clatter
of waters, the scream of the eagle, and the howling of wolves the only
sounds which broke upon the silence in that dreary and inhospitable
region.

Through this wild country it was that Sir Nigel and his Company pushed
their way, riding at times through vast defiles where the brown, gnarled
cliffs shot up on either side of them, and the sky was but a long
winding blue slit between the clustering lines of box which fringed the
lips of the precipices; or, again leading their horses along the narrow
and rocky paths worn by the muleteers upon the edges of the chasm, where
under their very elbows they could see the white streak which marked
the _gave_ which foamed a thousand feet below them. So for two days they
pushed their way through the wild places of Navarre, past Fuente,
over the rapid Ega, through Estella, until upon a winter's evening the
mountains fell away from in front of them, and they saw the broad blue
Ebro curving betwixt its double line of homesteads and of villages. The
fishers of Viana were aroused that night by rough voices speaking in a
strange tongue, and ere morning Sir Nigel and his men had ferried the
river and were safe upon the land of Spain.

All the next day they lay in a pine wood near to the town of Logrono,
resting their horses and taking counsel as to what they should do. Sir
Nigel had with him Sir William Felton, Sir Oliver Buttesthorn, stout old
Sir Simon Burley, the Scotch knight-errant, the Earl of Angus, and Sir
Richard Causton, all accounted among the bravest knights in the army,
together with sixty veteran men-at-arms, and three hundred and twenty
archers. Spies had been sent out in the morning, and returned after
nightfall to say that the King of Spain was encamped some fourteen miles
off in the direction of Burgos, having with him twenty thousand horse
and forty-five thousand foot.

A dry-wood fire had been lit, and round this the leaders crouched, the
glare beating upon their rugged faces, while the hardy archers lounged
and chatted amid the tethered horses, while they munched their scanty
provisions.

�For my part,� said Sir Simon Burley, �I am of opinion that we have
already done that which we have come for. For do we not now know where
the king is, and how great a following he hath, which was the end of our
journey.�

�True,� answered Sir William Felton, �but I have come on this venture
because it is a long time since I have broken a spear in war, and,
certes, I shall not go back until I have run a course with some cavalier
of Spain. Let those go back who will, but I must see more of these
Spaniards ere I turn.�

�I will not leave you, Sir William,� returned Sir Simon Burley; �and
yet, as an old soldier and one who hath seen much of war, I cannot but
think that it is an ill thing for four hundred men to find themselves
between an army of sixty thousand on the one side and a broad river on
the other.�

�Yet,� said Sir Richard Causton, �we cannot for the honor of England go
back without a blow struck.�

�Nor for the honor of Scotland either,� cried the Earl of Angus. �By
Saint Andrew! I wish that I may never set eyes upon the water of
Leith again, if I pluck my horse's bridle ere I have seen this camp of
theirs.�

�By Saint Paul! you have spoken very well,� said Sir Nigel, �and I have
always heard that there were very worthy gentlemen among the Scots, and
fine skirmishing to be had upon their border. Bethink you, Sir Simon,
that we have this news from the lips of common spies, who can scarce
tell us as much of the enemy and of his forces as the prince would wish
to hear.�

�You are the leader in this venture, Sir Nigel,� the other answered,
�and I do but ride under your banner.�

�Yet I would fain have your rede and counsel, Sir Simon. But, touching
what you say of the river, we can take heed that we shall not have it
at the back of us, for the prince hath now advanced to Salvatierra, and
thence to Vittoria, so that if we come upon their camp from the further
side we can make good our retreat.�

�What then would you propose?� asked Sir Simon, shaking his grizzled
head as one who is but half convinced.

�That we ride forward ere the news reach them that we have crossed the
river. In this way we may have sight of their army, and perchance even
find occasion for some small deed against them.�

�So be it, then,� said Sir Simon Burley; and the rest of the council
having approved, a scanty meal was hurriedly snatched, and the advance
resumed under the cover of the darkness. All night they led their
horses, stumbling and groping through wild defiles and rugged valleys,
following the guidance of a frightened peasant who was strapped by the
wrist to Black Simon's stirrup-leather. With the early dawn they found
themselves in a black ravine, with others sloping away from it on either
side, and the bare brown crags rising in long bleak terraces all round
them.

�If it please you, fair lord,� said Black Simon, �this man hath misled
us, and since there is no tree upon which we may hang him, it might be
well to hurl him over yonder cliff.�

The peasant, reading the soldier's meaning in his fierce eyes and harsh
accents dropped upon his knees, screaming loudly for mercy.

�How comes it, dog?� asked Sir William Felton in Spanish. �Where is this
camp to which you swore that you would lead us?�

�By the sweet Virgin! By the blessed Mother of God!� cried the trembling
peasant, �I swear to you that in the darkness I have myself lost the
path.�

�Over the cliff with him!� shouted half a dozen voices; but ere the
archers could drag him from the rocks to which he clung Sir Nigel had
ridden up and called upon them to stop.

�How is this, sirs?� said he. �As long as the prince doth me the honor
to entrust this venture to me, it is for me only to give orders; and,
by Saint Paul! I shall be right blithe to go very deeply into the
matter with any one to whom my words may give offence. How say you, Sir
William? Or you, my Lord of Angus? Or you, Sir Richard?�

�Nay, nay, Nigel!� cried Sir William. �This base peasant is too small
a matter for old comrades to quarrel over. But he hath betrayed us, and
certes he hath merited a dog's death.�

�Hark ye, fellow,� said Sir Nigel. �We give you one more chance to
find the path. We are about to gain much honor, Sir William, in this
enterprise, and it would be a sorry thing if the first blood shed were
that of an unworthy boor. Let us say our morning orisons, and it may
chance that ere we finish he may strike upon the track.�

With bowed heads and steel caps in hand, the archers stood at their
horse's heads, while Sir Simon Burley repeated the Pater, the Ave, and
the Credo. Long did Alleyne bear the scene in mind--the knot of knights
in their dull leaden-hued armor, the ruddy visage of Sir Oliver, the
craggy features of the Scottish earl, the shining scalp of Sir Nigel,
with the dense ring of hard, bearded faces and the long brown heads of
the horses, all topped and circled by the beetling cliffs. Scarce had
the last deep �amen� broken from the Company, when, in an instant, there
rose the scream of a hundred bugles, with the deep rolling of drums and
the clashing of cymbals, all sounding together in one deafening uproar.
Knights and archers sprang to arms, convinced that some great host was
upon them; but the guide dropped upon his knees and thanked Heaven for
its mercies.

�We have found them, caballeros!� he cried. �This is their morning call.
If ye will but deign to follow me, I will set them before you ere a man
might tell his beads.�

As he spoke he scrambled down one of the narrow ravines, and, climbing
over a low ridge at the further end, he led them into a short valley
with a stream purling down the centre of it and a very thick growth of
elder and of box upon either side. Pushing their way through the dense
brushwood, they looked out upon a scene which made their hearts beat
harder and their breath come faster.

In front of them there lay a broad plain, watered by two winding streams
and covered with grass, stretching away to where, in the furthest
distance, the towers of Burgos bristled up against the light blue
morning sky. Over all this vast meadow there lay a great city of
tents--thousands upon thousands of them, laid out in streets and in
squares like a well-ordered town. High silken pavilions or colored
marquees, shooting up from among the crowd of meaner dwellings, marked
where the great lords and barons of Leon and Castile displayed their
standards, while over the white roofs, as far as eye could reach, the
waving of ancients, pavons, pensils, and banderoles, with flash of gold
and glow of colors, proclaimed that all the chivalry of Iberia were
mustered in the plain beneath them. Far off, in the centre of the camp,
a huge palace of red and white silk, with the royal arms of Castile
waiving from the summit, announced that the gallant Henry lay there in
the midst of his warriors.

As the English adventurers, peeping out from behind their brushwood
screen, looked down upon this wondrous sight they could see that the
vast army in front of them was already afoot. The first pink light of
the rising sun glittered upon the steel caps and breastplates of dense
masses of slingers and of crossbowmen, who drilled and marched in the
spaces which had been left for their exercise. A thousand columns of
smoke reeked up into the pure morning air where the faggots were piled
and the camp-kettles already simmering.  In the open plain clouds of
light horse galloped and swooped with swaying bodies and waving
javelins, after the fashion which the Spanish had adopted from their
Moorish enemies. All along by the sedgy banks of the rivers long lines
of pages led their masters' chargers down to water, while the knights
themselves lounged in gayly-dressed groups about the doors of their
pavilions, or rode out, with their falcons upon their wrists and their
greyhounds behind them, in quest of quail or of leveret.

�By my hilt! mon gar.!� whispered Aylward to Alleyne, as the young
squire stood with parted lips and wondering eyes, gazing down at the
novel scene before him, �we have been seeking them all night, but now
that we have found them I know not what we are to do with them.�

�You say sooth, Samkin,� quoth old Johnston. �I would that we were upon
the far side of Ebro again, for there is neither honor nor profit to be
gained here. What say you, Simon?�

�By the rood!� cried the fierce man-at-arms, �I will see the color of
their blood ere I turn my mare's head for the mountains. Am I a child,
that I should ride for three days and nought but words at the end of
it?�

�Well said, my sweet honeysuckle!� cried Hordle John. �I am with you,
like hilt to blade. Could I but lay hands upon one of those gay prancers
yonder, I doubt not that I should have ransom enough from him to buy my
mother a new cow.�

�A cow!� said Aylward. �Say rather ten acres and a homestead on the
banks of Avon.�

�Say you so? Then, by our Lady! here is for yonder one in the red
jerkin!�

He was about to push recklessly forward into the open, when Sir Nigel
himself darted in front of him, with his hand upon his breast.

�Back!� said he. �Our time is not yet come, and we must lie here until
evening. Throw off your jacks and headpieces, least their eyes catch the
shine, and tether the horses among the rocks.�

The order was swiftly obeyed, and in ten minutes the archers were
stretched along by the side of the brook, munching the bread and the
bacon which they had brought in their bags, and craning their necks to
watch the ever-changing scene beneath them. Very quiet and still they
lay, save for a muttered jest or whispered order, for twice during the
long morning they heard bugle-calls from amid the hills on either side
of them, which showed that they had thrust themselves in between the
outposts of the enemy. The leaders sat amongst the box-wood, and took
counsel together as to what they should do; while from below there
surged up the buzz of voices, the shouting, the neighing of horses, and
all the uproar of a great camp.

�What boots it to wait?� said Sir William Felton. �Let us ride down upon
their camp ere they discover us.�

�And so say I,� cried the Scottish earl; �for they do not know that
there is any enemy within thirty long leagues of them.�

�For my part,� said Sir Simon Burley, �I think that it is madness, for
you cannot hope to rout this great army; and where are you to go and
what are you to do when they have turned upon you? How say you, Sir
Oliver Buttesthorn?�

�By the apple of Eve!� cried the fat knight, �it appears to me that
this wind brings a very savory smell of garlic and of onions from their
cooking-kettles. I am in favor of riding down upon them at once, if my
old friend and comrade here is of the same mind.�

�Nay,� said Sir Nigel, �I have a plan by which we may attempt some small
deed upon them, and yet, by the help of God, may be able to draw off
again; which, as Sir Simon Burley hath said, would be scarce possible in
any other way.�

�How then, Sir Nigel?� asked several voices.

�We shall lie here all day; for amid this brushwood it is ill for them
to see us. Then when evening comes we shall sally out upon them and see
if we may not gain some honorable advancement from them.�

�But why then rather than now?�

�Because we shall have nightfall to cover us when we draw off, so that
we may make our way back through the mountains. I would station a score
of archers here in the pass, with all our pennons jutting forth from the
rocks, and as many nakirs and drums and bugles as we have with us, so
that those who follow us in the fading light may think that the whole
army of the prince is upon them, and fear to go further. What think you
of my plan, Sir Simon?�

�By my troth! I think very well of it,� cried the prudent old commander.
�If four hundred men must needs run a tilt against sixty thousand, I
cannot see how they can do it better or more safely.�

�And so say I,� cried Felton, heartily. �But I wish the day were over,
for it will be an ill thing for us if they chance to light upon us.�

The words were scarce out of his mouth when there came a clatter of
loose stones, the sharp clink of trotting hoofs, and a dark-faced
cavalier, mounted upon a white horse, burst through the bushes and rode
swiftly down the valley from the end which was farthest from the Spanish
camp. Lightly armed, with his vizor open and a hawk perched upon his
left wrist, he looked about him with the careless air of a man who is
bent wholly upon pleasure, and unconscious of the possibility of danger.
Suddenly, however, his eyes lit upon the fierce faces which glared out
at him from the brushwood. With a cry of terror, he thrust his spurs
into his horse's sides and dashed for the narrow opening of the gorge.
For a moment it seemed as though he would have reached it, for he had
trampled over or dashed aside the archers who threw themselves in his
way; but Hordle John seized him by the foot in his grasp of iron and
dragged him from the saddle, while two others caught the frightened
horse.

�Ho, ho!� roared the great archer. �How many cows wilt buy my mother, if
I set thee free?�

�Hush that bull's bellowing!� cried Sir Nigel impatiently. �Bring the
man here. By St. Paul! it is not the first time that we have met; for,
if I mistake not, it is Don Diego Alvarez, who was once at the prince's
court.�

�It is indeed I,� said the Spanish knight, speaking in the French
tongue, �and I pray you to pass your sword through my heart, for how can
I live--I, a caballero of Castile--after being dragged from my horse by
the base hands of a common archer?�

�Fret not for that,� answered Sir Nigel. �For, in sooth, had he not
pulled you down, a dozen cloth-yard shafts had crossed each other in
your body.�

�By St. James! it were better so than to be polluted by his touch,�
 answered the Spaniard, with his black eyes sparkling with rage and
hatred. �I trust that I am now the prisoner of some honorable knight or
gentleman.�

�You are the prisoner of the man who took you, Sir Diego,� answered Sir
Nigel. �And I may tell you that better men than either you or I have
found themselves before now prisoners in the hands of archers of
England.�

�What ransom, then, does he demand?� asked the Spaniard.

Big John scratched his red head and grinned in high delight when the
question was propounded to him. �Tell him,� said he, �that I shall have
ten cows and a bull too, if it be but a little one. Also a dress of
blue sendall for mother and a red one for Joan; with five acres of
pasture-land, two scythes, and a fine new grindstone. Likewise a small
house, with stalls for the cows, and thirty-six gallons of beer for the
thirsty weather.�

�Tut, tut!� cried Sir Nigel, laughing. �All these things may be had for
money; and I think, Don Diego, that five thousand crowns is not too much
for so renowned a knight.�

�It shall be duly paid him.�

�For some days we must keep you with us; and I must crave leave also to
use your shield, your armor, and your horse.�

�My harness is yours by the law of arms,� said the Spaniard, gloomily.

�I do but ask the loan of it. I have need of it this day, but it shall
be duly returned to you. Set guards, Aylward, with arrow on string, at
either end of the pass; for it may happen that some other cavaliers may
visit us ere the time be come.� All day the little band of Englishmen
lay in the sheltered gorge, looking down upon the vast host of their
unconscious enemies. Shortly after mid-day, a great uproar of shouting
and cheering broke out in the camp, with mustering of men and calling of
bugles. Clambering up among the rocks, the companions saw a long rolling
cloud of dust along the whole eastern sky-line, with the glint of spears
and the flutter of pennons, which announced the approach of a large body
of cavalry. For a moment a wild hope came upon them that perhaps the
prince had moved more swiftly than had been planned, that he had crossed
the Ebro, and that this was his vanguard sweeping to the attack.

�Surely I see the red pile of Chandos at the head of yonder squadron!�
 cried Sir Richard Causton, shading his eyes with his hand.

�Not so,� answered Sir Simon Burley, who had watched the approaching
host with a darkening face. �It is even as I feared. That is the double
eagle of Du Guesclin.�

�You say very truly,� cried the Earl of Angus. �These are the levies of
France, for I can see the ensigns of the Marshal d'Andreghen, with
that of the Lord of Antoing and of Briseuil, and of many another from
Brittany and Anjou.�

�By St. Paul! I am very glad of it,� said Sir Nigel. �Of these Spaniards
I know nothing; but the French are very worthy gentlemen, and will do
what they can for our advancement.�

�There are at the least four thousand of them, and all men-at-arms,�
 cried Sir William Felton. �See, there is Bertrand himself, beside his
banner, and there is King Henry, who rides to welcome him. Now they all
turn and come into the camp together.�

As he spoke, the vast throng of Spaniards and of Frenchmen trooped
across the plain, with brandished arms and tossing banners. All day long
the sound of revelry and of rejoicing from the crowded camp swelled up
to the ears of the Englishmen, and they could see the soldiers of the
two nations throwing themselves into each other's arms and dancing
hand-in-hand round the blazing fires. The sun had sunk behind a
cloud-bank in the west before Sir Nigel at last gave word that the men
should resume their arms and have their horses ready. He had himself
thrown off his armor, and had dressed himself from head to foot in the
harness of the captured Spaniard.

�Sir William,� said he, �it is my intention to attempt a small deed, and
I ask you therefore that you will lead this outfall upon the camp. For
me, I will ride into their camp with my squire and two archers. I pray
you to watch me, and to ride forth when I am come among the tents. You
will leave twenty men behind here, as we planned this morning, and you
will ride back here after you have ventured as far as seems good to
you.�

�I will do as you order, Nigel; but what is it that you propose to do?�

�You will see anon, and indeed it is but a trifling matter. Alleyne, you
will come with me, and lead a spare horse by the bridle. I will have the
two archers who rode with us through France, for they are trusty men and
of stout heart. Let them ride behind us, and let them leave their bows
here among the bushes for it is not my wish that they should know that
we are Englishmen. Say no word to any whom we may meet, and, if any
speak to you, pass on as though you heard them not. Are you ready?�

�I am ready, my fair lord,� said Alleyne.

�And I,� �And I,� cried Aylward and John.

�Then the rest I leave to your wisdom, Sir William; and if God sends us
fortune we shall meet you again in this gorge ere it be dark.�

So saying, Sir Nigel mounted the white horse of the Spanish cavalier,
and rode quietly forth from his concealment with his three companions
behind him, Alleyne leading his master's own steed by the bridle. So
many small parties of French and Spanish horse were sweeping hither and
thither that the small band attracted little notice, and making its way
at a gentle trot across the plain, they came as far as the camp without
challenge or hindrance. On and on they pushed past the endless lines of
tents, amid the dense swarms of horsemen and of footmen, until the huge
royal pavilion stretched in front of them. They were close upon it when
of a sudden there broke out a wild hubbub from a distant portion of the
camp, with screams and war-cries and all the wild tumult of battle. At
the sound soldiers came rushing from their tents, knights shouted loudly
for their squires, and there was mad turmoil on every hand of bewildered
men and plunging horses. At the royal tent a crowd of gorgeously dressed
servants ran hither and thither in helpless panic for the guard
of soldiers who were stationed there had already ridden off in the
direction of the alarm. A man-at-arms on either side of the doorway were
the sole protectors of the royal dwelling.

�I have come for the king,� whispered Sir Nigel; �and, by Saint Paul! he
must back with us or I must bide here.�

Alleyne and Aylward sprang from their horses, and flew at the two
sentries, who were disarmed and beaten down in an instant by so furious
and unexpected an attack. Sir Nigel dashed into the royal tent, and was
followed by Hordle John as soon as the horses had been secured. From
within came wild screamings and the clash of steel, and then the two
emerged once more, their swords and forearms reddened with blood,
while John bore over his shoulder the senseless body of a man whose gay
surcoat, adorned with the lions and towers of Castile, proclaimed him
to belong to the royal house. A crowd of white-faced sewers and pages
swarmed at their heels, those behind pushing forwards, while the
foremost shrank back from the fierce faces and reeking weapons of the
adventurers. The senseless body was thrown across the spare horse, the
four sprang to their saddles, and away they thundered with loose reins
and busy spurs through the swarming camp.

But confusion and disorder still reigned among the Spaniards for Sir
William Felton and his men had swept through half their camp, leaving
a long litter of the dead and the dying to mark their course. Uncertain
who were their attackers, and unable to tell their English enemies
from their newly-arrived Breton allies, the Spanish knights rode wildly
hither and thither in aimless fury. The mad turmoil, the mixture of
races, and the fading light, were all in favor of the four who alone
knew their own purpose among the vast uncertain multitude. Twice ere
they reached open ground they had to break their way through small
bodies of horses, and once there came a whistle of arrows and singing of
stones about their ears; but, still dashing onwards, they shot out
from among the tents and found their own comrades retreating for the
mountains at no very great distance from them. Another five minutes of
wild galloping over the plain, and they were all back in their gorge,
while their pursuers fell back before the rolling of drums and blare of
trumpets, which seemed to proclaim that the whole army of the prince was
about to emerge from the mountain passes.

�By my soul! Nigel,� cried Sir Oliver, waving a great boiled ham over
his head, �I have come by something which I may eat with my truffles! I
had a hard fight for it, for there were three of them with their mouths
open and the knives in their hands, all sitting agape round the table,
when I rushed in upon them. How say you, Sir William, will you not try
the smack of the famed Spanish swine, though we have but the brook water
to wash it down?�

�Later, Sir Oliver,� answered the old soldier, wiping his grimed face.
�We must further into the mountains ere we be in safety. But what have
we here, Nigel?�

�It is a prisoner whom I have taken, and in sooth, as he came from the
royal tent and wears the royal arms upon his jupon, I trust that he is
the King of Spain.�

�The King of Spain!� cried the companions, crowding round in amazement.

�Nay, Sir Nigel,� said Felton, peering at the prisoner through the
uncertain light, �I have twice seen Henry of Transtamare, and certes
this man in no way resembles him.�

�Then, by the light of heaven! I will ride back for him,� cried Sir
Nigel.

�Nay, nay, the camp is in arms, and it would be rank madness. Who are
you, fellow?� he added in Spanish, �and how is it that you dare to wear
the arms of Castile?�

The prisoner was bent recovering the consciousness which had been
squeezed from him by the grip of Hordle John. �If it please you,� he
answered, �I and nine others are the body-squires of the king, and must
ever wear his arms, so as to shield him from even such perils as have
threatened him this night. The king is at the tent of the brave Du
Guesclin, where he will sup to night. But I am a caballero of Aragon,
Don Sancho Penelosa, and, though I be no king, I am yet ready to pay a
fitting price for my ransom.�

�By Saint Paul! I will not touch your gold,� cried Sir Nigel. �Go back
to your master and give him greeting from Sir Nigel Loring of Twynham
Castle, telling him that I had hoped to make his better acquaintance
this night, and that, if I have disordered his tent, it was but in my
eagerness to know so famed and courteous a knight. Spur on, comrades!
for we must cover many a league ere we can venture to light fire or to
loosen girth. I had hoped to ride without this patch to-night, but it
seems that I must carry it yet a little longer.�



CHAPTER XXXVI. HOW SIR NIGEL TOOK THE PATCH FROM HIS EYE.


It was a cold, bleak morning in the beginning of March, and the mist was
drifting in dense rolling clouds through the passes of the Cantabrian
mountains. The Company, who had passed the night in a sheltered gully,
were already astir, some crowding round the blazing fires and others
romping or leaping over each other's backs for their limbs were chilled
and the air biting. Here and there, through the dense haze which
surrounded them, there loomed out huge pinnacles and jutting boulders
of rock: while high above the sea of vapor there towered up one gigantic
peak, with the pink glow of the early sunshine upon its snow-capped
head. The ground was wet, the rocks dripping, the grass and ever-greens
sparkling with beads of moisture; yet the camp was loud with laughter
and merriment, for a messenger had ridden in from the prince with words
of heart-stirring praise for what they had done, and with orders that
they should still abide in the forefront of the army.

Round one of the fires were clustered four or five of the leading men
of the archers, cleaning the rust from their weapons, and glancing
impatiently from time to time at a great pot which smoked over the
blaze. There was Aylward squatting cross-legged in his shirt, while he
scrubbed away at his chain-mail brigandine, whistling loudly the while.
On one side of him sat old Johnston, who was busy in trimming the
feathers of some arrows to his liking; and on the other Hordle John, who
lay with his great limbs all asprawl, and his headpiece balanced upon
his uplifted foot. Black Simon of Norwich crouched amid the rocks,
crooning an Eastland ballad to himself, while he whetted his sword upon
a flat stone which lay across his knees; while beside him sat Alleyne
Edricson, and Norbury, the silent squire of Sir Oliver, holding out
their chilled hands towards the crackling faggots.

�Cast on another culpon, John, and stir the broth with thy
sword-sheath,� growled Johnston, looking anxiously for the twentieth
time at the reeking pot.

�By my hilt!� cried Aylward, �now that John hath come by this great
ransom, he will scarce abide the fare of poor archer lads. How say you,
camarade? When you see Hordle once more, there will be no penny ale and
fat bacon, but Gascon wines and baked meats every day of the seven.�

�I know not about that,� said John, kicking his helmet up into the air
and catching it in his hand. �I do but know that whether the broth be
ready or no, I am about to dip this into it.�

�It simmers and it boils,� cried Johnston, pushing his hard-lined face
through the smoke. In an instant the pot had been plucked from the
blaze, and its contents had been scooped up in half a dozen steel
head-pieces, which were balanced betwixt their owners' knees, while,
with spoon and gobbet of bread, they devoured their morning meal.

�It is ill weather for bows,� remarked John at last, when, with a long
sigh, he drained the last drop from his helmet. �My strings are as limp
as a cow's tail this morning.�

�You should rub them with water glue,� quoth Johnston. �You remember,
Samkin, that it was wetter than this on the morning of Crecy, and yet I
cannot call to mind that there was aught amiss with our strings.�

�It is in my thoughts,� said Black Simon, still pensively grinding his
sword, �that we may have need of your strings ere sundown. I dreamed of
the red cow last night.�

�And what is this red cow, Simon?� asked Alleyne.

�I know not, young sir; but I can only say that on the eve of Cadsand,
and on the eve of Crecy, and on the eve of Nogent, I dreamed of a red
cow; and now the dream has come upon me again, so I am now setting a
very keen edge to my blade.�

�Well said, old war-dog!� cried Aylward. �By my hilt! I pray that your
dream may come true, for the prince hath not set us out here to drink
broth or to gather whortle-berries. One more fight, and I am ready to
hang up my bow, marry a wife, and take to the fire corner. But how now,
Robin? Whom is it that you seek?�

�The Lord Loring craves your attendance in his tent,� said a young
archer to Alleyne.

The squire rose and proceeded to the pavilion, where he found the knight
seated upon a cushion, with his legs crossed in front of him and a broad
ribbon of parchment laid across his knees, over which he was poring with
frowning brows and pursed lips.

�It came this morning by the prince's messenger,� said he, �and was
brought from England by Sir John Fallislee, who is new come from Sussex.
What make you of this upon the outer side?�

�It is fairly and clearly written,� Alleyne answered, �and it signifies
To Sir Nigel Loring, Knight Constable of Twynham Castle, by the hand of
Christopher, the servant of God at the Priory of Christchurch.�

�So I read it,� said Sir Nigel. �Now I pray you to read what is set
forth within.�

Alleyne turned to the letter, and, as his eyes rested upon it, his face
turned pale and a cry of surprise and grief burst from his lips.

�What then?� asked the knight, peering up at him anxiously. �There is
nought amiss with the Lady Mary or with the Lady Maude?�

�It is my brother--my poor unhappy brother!� cried Alleyne, with his
hand to his brow. �He is dead.�

�By Saint Paul! I have never heard that he had shown so much love for
you that you should mourn him so.�

�Yet he was my brother--the only kith or kin that I had upon earth.
Mayhap he had cause to be bitter against me, for his land was given to
the abbey for my upbringing. Alas! alas! and I raised my staff against
him when last we met! He has been slain--and slain, I fear, amidst crime
and violence.�

�Ha!� said Sir Nigel. �Read on, I pray you.�

�'God be with thee, my honored lord, and have thee in his holy keeping.
The Lady Loring hath asked me to set down in writing what hath befallen
at Twynham, and all that concerns the death of thy ill neighbor the
Socman of Minstead. For when ye had left us, this evil man gathered
around him all outlaws, villeins, and masterless men, until they were
come to such a force that they slew and scattered the king's men who
went against them. Then, coming forth from the woods, they laid siege to
thy castle, and for two days they girt us in and shot hard against us,
with such numbers as were a marvel to see. Yet the Lady Loring held the
place stoutly, and on the second day the Socman was slain--by his own
men, as some think--so that we were delivered from their hands; for
which praise be to all the saints, and more especially to the holy
Anselm, upon whose feast it came to pass. The Lady Loring, and the Lady
Maude, thy fair daughter, are in good health; and so also am I, save for
an imposthume of the toe-joint, which hath been sent me for my sins. May
all the saints preserve thee!'�

�It was the vision of the Lady Tiphaine,� said Sir Nigel, after a pause.
�Marked you not how she said that the leader was one with a yellow
beard, and how he fell before the gate. But how came it, Alleyne, that
this woman, to whom all things are as crystal, and who hath not said one
word which has not come to pass, was yet so led astray as to say that
your thoughts turned to Twynham Castle even more than my own?�

�My fair lord,� said Alleyne, with a flush on his weather-stained
cheeks, �the Lady Tiphaine may have spoken sooth when she said it; for
Twynham Castle is in my heart by day and in my dreams by night.�

�Ha!� cried Sir Nigel, with a sidelong glance.

�Yes, my fair lord; for indeed I love your daughter, the Lady Maude;
and, unworthy as I am, I would give my heart's blood to serve her.�

�By St. Paul! Edricson,� said the knight coldly, arching his eyebrows,
�you aim high in this matter. Our blood is very old.�

�And mine also is very old,� answered the squire.

�And the Lady Maude is our single child. All our name and lands centre
upon her.�

�Alas! that I should say it, but I also am now the only Edricson.�

�And why have I not heard this from you before, Alleyne? In sooth, I
think that you have used me ill.�

�Nay, my fair lord, say not so; for I know not whether your daughter
loves me, and there is no pledge between us.�

Sir Nigel pondered for a few moments, and then burst out a-laughing. �By
St. Paul!� said he, �I know not why I should mix in the matter; for I
have ever found that the Lady Maud was very well able to
look to her own affairs. Since first she could stamp her little foot,
she hath ever been able to get that for which she craved; and if she set
her heart on thee, Alleyne, and thou on her, I do not think that this
Spanish king, with his three-score thousand men, could hold you apart.
Yet this I will say, that I would see you a full knight ere you go to my
daughter with words of love. I have ever said that a brave lance should
wed her; and, by my soul! Edricson, if God spare you, I think that you
will acquit yourself well. But enough of such trifles, for we have our
work before us, and it will be time to speak of this matter when we see
the white cliffs of England once more. Go to Sir William Felton, I pray
you, and ask him to come hither, for it is time that we were marching.
There is no pass at the further end of the valley, and it is a perilous
place should an enemy come upon us.�

Alleyne delivered his message, and then wandered forth from the camp,
for his mind was all in a whirl with this unexpected news, and with his
talk with Sir Nigel. Sitting upon a rock, with his burning brow resting
upon his hands, he thought of his brother, of their quarrel, of the Lady
Maude in her bedraggled riding-dress, of the gray old castle, of the
proud pale face in the armory, and of the last fiery words with which
she had sped him on his way. Then he was but a penniless, monk-bred lad,
unknown and unfriended. Now he was himself Socman of Minstead, the head
of an old stock, and the lord of an estate which, if reduced from its
former size, was still ample to preserve the dignity of his family.
Further, he had become a man of experience, was counted brave among
brave men, had won the esteem and confidence of her father, and, above
all, had been listened to by him when he told him the secret of his
love. As to the gaining of knighthood, in such stirring times it was no
great matter for a brave squire of gentle birth to aspire to that honor.
He would leave his bones among these Spanish ravines, or he would do
some deed which would call the eyes of men upon him.

Alleyne was still seated on the rock, his griefs and his joys drifting
swiftly over his mind like the shadow of clouds upon a sunlit meadow,
when of a sudden he became conscious of a low, deep sound which came
booming up to him through the fog. Close behind him he could hear the
murmur of the bowmen, the occasional bursts of hoarse laughter, and the
champing and stamping of their horses. Behind it all, however, came that
low-pitched, deep-toned hum, which seemed to come from every quarter and
to fill the whole air. In the old monastic days he remembered to
have heard such a sound when he had walked out one windy night at
Bucklershard, and had listened to the long waves breaking upon the
shingly shore. Here, however, was neither wind nor sea, and yet the dull
murmur rose ever louder and stronger out of the heart of the rolling sea
of vapor. He turned and ran to the camp, shouting an alarm at the top of
his voice.

It was but a hundred paces, and yet ere he had crossed it every bowman
was ready at his horse's head, and the group of knights were out and
listening intently to the ominous sound.

�It is a great body of horse,� said Sir William Felton, �and they are
riding very swiftly hitherwards.�

�Yet they must be from the prince's army,� remarked Sir Richard Causton,
�for they come from the north.�

�Nay,� said the Earl of Angus, �it is not so certain; for the peasant
with whom we spoke last night said that it was rumored that Don Tello,
the Spanish king's brother, had ridden with six thousand chosen men to
beat up the prince's camp. It may be that on their backward road they
have come this way.�

�By St. Paul!� cried Sir Nigel, �I think that it is even as you say, for
that same peasant had a sour face and a shifting eye, as one who bore us
little good will. I doubt not that he has brought these cavaliers upon
us.�

�But the mist covers us,� said Sir Simon Burley. �We have yet time to
ride through the further end of the pass.�

�Were we a troop of mountain goats we might do so,� answered Sir William
Felton, �but it is not to be passed by a company of horsemen. If these
be indeed Don Tello and his men, then we must bide where we are, and do
what we can to make them rue the day that they found us in their path.�

�Well spoken, William!� cried Sir Nigel, in high delight. �If there be
so many as has been said, then there will be much honor to be gained
from them and every hope of advancement. But the sound has ceased, and I
fear that they have gone some other way.�

�Or mayhap they have come to the mouth of the gorge, and are marshalling
their ranks. Hush and hearken! for they are no great way from us.�

The Company stood peering into the dense fog-wreath, amidst a silence so
profound that the dripping of the water from the rocks and the breathing
of the horses grew loud upon the ear. Suddenly from out the sea of mist
came the shrill sound of a neigh, followed by a long blast upon a bugle.

�It is a Spanish call, my fair lord,� said Black Simon. �It is used by
their prickers and huntsmen when the beast hath not fled, but is still
in its lair.�

�By my faith!� said Sir Nigel, smiling, �if they are in a humor for
venerie we may promise them some sport ere they sound the mort over us.
But there is a hill in the centre of the gorge on which we might take
our stand.�

�I marked it yester-night,� said Felton, �and no better spot could be
found for our purpose, for it is very steep at the back. It is but a
bow-shot to the left, and, indeed, I can see the shadow of it.�

The whole Company, leading their horses, passed across to the small hill
which loomed in front of them out of the mist. It was indeed admirably
designed for defence, for it sloped down in front, all jagged and
boulder-strewn, while it fell away in a sheer cliff of a hundred feet or
more. On the summit was a small uneven plateau, with a stretch across of
a hundred paces, and a depth of half as much again.

�Unloose the horses!� said Sir Nigel. �We have no space for them, and if
we hold our own we shall have horses and to spare when this day's work
is done. Nay, keep yours, my fair sirs, for we may have work for them.
Aylward, Johnston, let your men form a harrow on either side of the
ridge. Sir Oliver and you, my Lord Angus, I give you the right wing, and
the left to you, Sir Simon, and to you, Sir Richard Causton. I and Sir
William Felton will hold the centre with our men-at-arms. Now order
the ranks, and fling wide the banners, for our souls are God's and our
bodies the king's, and our swords for Saint George and for England!�

Sir Nigel had scarcely spoken when the mist seemed to thin in the
valley, and to shred away into long ragged clouds which trailed from
the edges of the cliffs. The gorge in which they had camped was a mere
wedge-shaped cleft among the hills, three-quarters of a mile deep, with
the small rugged rising upon which they stood at the further end, and
the brown crags walling it in on three sides. As the mist parted, and
the sun broke through, it gleamed and shimmered with dazzling brightness
upon the armor and headpieces of a vast body of horsemen who stretched
across the barranca from one cliff to the other, and extended backwards
until their rear guard were far out upon the plain beyond. Line after
line, and rank after rank, they choked the neck of the valley with
a long vista of tossing pennons, twinkling lances, waving plumes and
streaming banderoles, while the curvets and gambades of the chargers
lent a constant motion and shimmer to the glittering, many-colored mass.
A yell of exultation, and a forest of waving steel through the length
and breadth of their column, announced that they could at last see their
entrapped enemies, while the swelling notes of a hundred bugles and
drums, mixed with the clash of Moorish cymbals, broke forth into a proud
peal of martial triumph. Strange it was to these gallant and sparkling
cavaliers of Spain to look upon this handful of men upon the hill, the
thin lines of bowmen, the knots of knights and men-at-arms with armor
rusted and discolored from long service, and to learn that these were
indeed the soldiers whose fame and prowess had been the camp-fire talk
of every army in Christendom. Very still and silent they stood, leaning
upon their bows, while their leaders took counsel together in front of
them. No clang of bugle rose from their stern ranks, but in the centre
waved the leopards of England, on the right the ensign of their Company
with the roses of Loring, and on the left, over three score of Welsh
bowmen, there floated the red banner of Merlin with the boars'-heads of
the Buttesthorns. Gravely and sedately they stood beneath the morning
sun waiting for the onslaught of their foemen.

�By Saint Paul!� said Sir Nigel, gazing with puckered eye down the
valley, �there appear to be some very worthy people among them. What is
this golden banner which waves upon the left?�

�It is the ensign of the Knights of Calatrava,� answered Felton.

�And the other upon the right?�

�It marks the Knights of Santiago, and I see by his flag that their
grand-master rides at their head. There too is the banner of Castile
amid yonder sparkling squadron which heads the main battle. There are
six thousand men-at-arms with ten squadrons of slingers as far as I may
judge their numbers.�

�There are Frenchmen among them, my fair lord,� remarked Black Simon.
�I can see the pennons of De Couvette, De Brieux, Saint Pol, and many
others who struck in against us for Charles of Blois.�

�You are right,� said Sir William, �for I can also see them. There is
much Spanish blazonry also, if I could but read it. Don Diego, you know
the arms of your own land. Who are they who have done us this honor?�

The Spanish prisoner looked with exultant eyes upon the deep and serried
ranks of his countrymen.

�By Saint James!� said he, �if ye fall this day ye fall by no mean
hands, for the flower of the knighthood of Castile ride under the banner
of Don Tello, with the chivalry of Asturias, Toledo, Leon, Cordova,
Galicia, and Seville. I see the guidons of Albornez, Cacorla, Rodriguez,
Tavora, with the two great orders, and the knights of France and of
Aragon. If you will take my rede you will come to a composition with
them, for they will give you such terms as you have given me.�

�Nay, by Saint Paul! it were pity if so many brave men were drawn
together, and no little deed of arms to come of it. Ha! William, they
advance upon us; and, by my soul! it is a sight that is worth coming
over the seas to see.�

As he spoke, the two wings of the Spanish host, consisting of the
Knights of Calatrava on the one side and of Santiago upon the other,
came swooping swiftly down the valley, while the main body followed more
slowly behind. Five hundred paces from the English the two great bodies
of horse crossed each other, and, sweeping round in a curve, retired
in feigned confusion towards their centre. Often in bygone wars had the
Moors tempted the hot-blooded Spaniards from their places of strength by
such pretended flights, but there were men upon the hill to whom every
ruse and trick of war were as their daily trade and practice. Again and
even nearer came the rallying Spaniards, and again with cry of fear
and stooping bodies they swerved off to right and left, but the English
still stood stolid and observant among their rocks. The vanguard halted
a long bow shot from the hill, and with waving spears and vaunting
shouts challenged their enemies to come forth, while two cavaliers,
pricking forward from the glittering ranks, walked their horses slowly
between the two arrays with targets braced and lances in rest like the
challengers in a tourney.

�By Saint Paul!� cried Sir Nigel, with his one eye glowing like an
ember, �these appear to be two very worthy and debonair gentlemen. I do
not call to mind when I have seen any people who seemed of so great a
heart and so high of enterprise. We have our horses, Sir William: shall
we not relieve them of any vow which they may have upon their souls?�

Felton's reply was to bound upon his charger, and to urge it down the
slope, while Sir Nigel followed not three spears'-lengths behind him.
It was a rugged course, rocky and uneven, yet the two knights, choosing
their men, dashed onwards at the top of their speed, while the gallant
Spaniards flew as swiftly to meet them. The one to whom Felton found
himself opposed was a tall stripling with a stag's head upon his shield,
while Sir Nigel's man was broad and squat with plain steel harness, and
a pink and white torse bound round his helmet. The first struck Felton
on the target with such force as to split it from side to side, but Sir
William's lance crashed through the camail which shielded the Spaniard's
throat, and he fell, screaming hoarsely, to the ground. Carried away by
the heat and madness of fight, the English knight never drew rein, but
charged straight on into the array of the knights of Calatrava. Long
time the silent ranks upon the hill could see a swirl and eddy deep down
in the heart of the Spanish column, with a circle of rearing chargers
and flashing blades. Here and there tossed the white plume of the
English helmet, rising and falling like the foam upon a wave, with the
fierce gleam and sparkle ever circling round it until at last it had
sunk from view, and another brave man had turned from war to peace.

Sir Nigel, meanwhile, had found a foeman worthy of his steel for his
opponent was none other than Sebastian Gomez, the picked lance of
the monkish Knights of Santiago, who had won fame in a hundred bloody
combats with the Moors of Andalusia. So fierce was their meeting that
their spears shivered up to the very grasp, and the horses reared
backwards until it seemed that they must crash down upon their riders.
Yet with consummate horsemanship they both swung round in a long curvet,
and then plucking out their swords they lashed at each other like two
lusty smiths hammering upon an anvil. The chargers spun round each
other, biting and striking, while the two blades wheeled and whizzed and
circled in gleams of dazzling light. Cut, parry, and thrust followed
so swiftly upon each other that the eye could not follow them, until at
last coming thigh to thigh, they cast their arms around each other
and rolled off their saddles to the ground. The heavier Spaniard threw
himself upon his enemy, and pinning him down beneath him raised his
sword to slay him, while a shout of triumph rose from the ranks of his
countrymen. But the fatal blow never fell, for even as his arm quivered
before descending, the Spaniard gave a shudder, and stiffening himself
rolled heavily over upon his side, with the blood gushing from his
armpit and from the slit of his vizor. Sir Nigel sprang to his feet with
his bloody dagger in his left hand and gazed down upon his adversary,
but that fatal and sudden stab in the vital spot, which the Spaniard had
exposed by raising his arm, had proved instantly mortal. The Englishman
leaped upon his horse and made for the hill, at the very instant that a
yell of rage from a thousand voices and the clang of a score of bugles
announced the Spanish onset.

But the islanders were ready and eager for the encounter. With feet
firmly planted, their sleeves rolled back to give free play to their
muscles, their long yellow bow-staves in their left hands, and their
quivers slung to the front, they had waited in the four-deep harrow
formation which gave strength to their array, and yet permitted every
man to draw his arrow freely without harm to those in front. Aylward and
Johnston had been engaged in throwing light tufts of grass into the air
to gauge the wind force, and a hoarse whisper passed down the ranks from
the file-leaders to the men, with scraps of advice and admonition.

�Do not shoot outside the fifteen-score paces,� cried Johnston. �We may
need all our shafts ere we have done with them.�

�Better to overshoot than to undershoot,� added Aylward. �Better to
strike the rear guard than to feather a shaft in the earth.�

�Loose quick and sharp when they come,� added another. �Let it be the
eye to the string, the string to the shaft, and the shaft to the mark.
By Our Lady! their banners advance, and we must hold our ground now if
ever we are to see Southampton Water again.�

Alleyne, standing with his sword drawn amidst the archers, saw a long
toss and heave of the glittering squadrons. Then the front ranks began
to surge slowly forward, to trot, to canter, to gallop, and in an
instant the whole vast array was hurtling onward, line after line, the
air full of the thunder of their cries, the ground shaking with the beat
of their hoofs, the valley choked with the rushing torrent of steel,
topped by the waving plumes, the slanting spears and the fluttering
banderoles. On they swept over the level and up to the slope, ere they
met the blinding storm of the English arrows. Down went the whole ranks
in a whirl of mad confusion, horses plunging and kicking, bewildered men
falling, rising, staggering on or back, while ever new lines of horsemen
came spurring through the gaps and urged their chargers up the fatal
slope. All around him Alleyne could hear the stern, short orders of the
master-bowmen, while the air was filled with the keen twanging of the
strings and the swish and patter of the shafts. Right across the foot
of the hill there had sprung up a long wall of struggling horses and
stricken men, which ever grew and heightened as fresh squadrons poured
on the attack. One young knight on a gray jennet leaped over his fallen
comrades and galloped swiftly up the hill, shrieking loudly upon Saint
James, ere he fell within a spear-length of the English line, with the
feathers of arrows thrusting out from every crevice and joint of his
armor. So for five long minutes the gallant horsemen of Spain and of
France strove ever and again to force a passage, until the wailing
note of a bugle called them back, and they rode slowly out of bow-shot,
leaving their best and their bravest in the ghastly, blood-mottled heap
behind them.

But there was little rest for the victors. Whilst the knights had
charged them in front the slingers had crept round upon either flank and
had gained a footing upon the cliffs and behind the outlying rocks.
A storm of stones broke suddenly upon the defenders, who, drawn up in
lines upon the exposed summit, offered a fair mark to their hidden
foes. Johnston, the old archer, was struck upon the temple and fell dead
without a groan, while fifteen of his bowmen and six of the men-at-arms
were struck down at the same moment. The others lay on their faces to
avoid the deadly hail, while at each side of the plateau a fringe of
bowmen exchanged shots with the slingers and crossbowmen among the
rocks, aiming mainly at those who had swarmed up the cliffs, and
bursting into laughter and cheers when a well-aimed shaft brought one of
their opponents toppling down from his lofty perch.

�I think, Nigel,� said Sir Oliver, striding across to the little knight,
�that we should all acquit ourselves better had we our none-meat, for
the sun is high in the heaven.�

�By Saint Paul!� quoth Sir Nigel, plucking the patch from his eye,
�I think that I am now clear of my vow, for this Spanish knight was a
person from whom much honor might be won. Indeed, he was a very worthy
gentleman, of good courage, and great hardiness, and it grieves me that
he should have come by such a hurt. As to what you say of food, Oliver,
it is not to be thought of, for we have nothing with us upon the hill.�

�Nigel!� cried Sir Simon Burley, hurrying up with consternation upon his
face, �Aylward tells me that there are not ten-score arrows left in all
their sheaves. See! they are springing from their horses, and cutting
their sollerets that they may rush upon us. Might we not even now make a
retreat?�

�My soul will retreat from my body first!� cried the little knight.
�Here I am, and here I bide, while God gives me strength to lift a
sword.�

�And so say I!� shouted Sir Oliver, throwing his mace high into the air
and catching it again by the handle.

�To your arms, men!� roared Sir Nigel. �Shoot while you may, and then
out sword, and let us live or die together!�



CHAPTER XXXVII. HOW THE WHITE COMPANY CAME TO BE DISBANDED.


Then up rose from the hill in the rugged Cantabrian valley a sound such
as had not been heard in those parts before, nor was again, until
the streams which rippled amid the rocks had been frozen by over four
hundred winters and thawed by as many returning springs. Deep and full
and strong it thundered down the ravine, the fierce battle-call of a
warrior race, the last stern welcome to whoso should join with them in
that world-old game where the stake is death. Thrice it swelled forth
and thrice it sank away, echoing and reverberating amidst the crags.
Then, with set faces, the Company rose up among the storm of stones,
and looked down upon the thousands who sped swiftly up the slope against
them. Horse and spear had been set aside, but on foot, with sword and
battle-axe, their broad shields slung in front of them, the chivalry of
Spain rushed to the attack.

And now arose a struggle so fell, so long, so evenly sustained,
that even now the memory of it is handed down amongst the Cantabrian
mountaineers and the ill-omened knoll is still pointed out by fathers
to their children as the �Altura de los Inglesos,� where the men from
across the sea fought the great fight with the knights of the south. The
last arrow was quickly shot, nor could the slingers hurl their stones,
so close were friend and foe. From side to side stretched the thin line
of the English, lightly armed and quick-footed, while against it stormed
and raged the pressing throng of fiery Spaniards and of gallant Bretons.
The clink of crossing sword-blades, the dull thudding of heavy blows,
the panting and gasping of weary and wounded men, all rose together in
a wild, long-drawn note, which swelled upwards to the ears of the
wondering peasants who looked down from the edges of the cliffs upon the
swaying turmoil of the battle beneath them. Back and forward reeled the
leopard banner, now borne up the slope by the rush and weight of the
onslaught, now pushing downwards again as Sir Nigel, Burley, and Black
Simon with their veteran men-at arms, flung themselves madly into the
fray. Alleyne, at his lord's right hand, found himself swept hither and
thither in the desperate struggle, exchanging savage thrusts one instant
with a Spanish cavalier, and the next torn away by the whirl of men and
dashed up against some new antagonist. To the right Sir Oliver, Aylward,
Hordle John, and the bowmen of the Company fought furiously against the
monkish Knights of Santiago, who were led up the hill by their prior--a
great, deep-chested man, who wore a brown monastic habit over his suit
of mail. Three archers he slew in three giant strokes, but Sir Oliver
flung his arms round him, and the two, staggering and straining, reeled
backwards and fell, locked in each other's grasp, over the edge of the
steep cliff which flanked the hill. In vain his knights stormed and
raved against the thin line which barred their path: the sword of
Aylward and the great axe of John gleamed in the forefront of the battle
and huge jagged pieces of rock, hurled by the strong arms of the bowmen,
crashed and hurtled amid their ranks. Slowly they gave back down the
hill, the archers still hanging upon their skirts, with a long litter of
writhing and twisted figures to mark the course which they had taken. At
the same instant the Welshmen upon the left, led on by the Scotch earl,
had charged out from among the rocks which sheltered them, and by the
fury of their outfall had driven the Spaniards in front of them in
headlong flight down the hill. In the centre only things seemed to be
going ill with the defenders. Black Simon was down--dying, as he would
wish to have died, like a grim old wolf in its lair with a ring of his
slain around him. Twice Sir Nigel had been overborne, and twice Alleyne
had fought over him until he had staggered to his feet once more.
Burley lay senseless, stunned by a blow from a mace, and half of the
men-at-arms lay littered upon the ground around him. Sir Nigel's shield
was broken, his crest shorn, his armor cut and smashed, and the vizor
torn from his helmet; yet he sprang hither and thither with light
foot and ready hand, engaging two Bretons and a Spaniard at the same
instant--thrusting, stooping, dashing in, springing out--while Alleyne
still fought by his side, stemming with a handful of men the fierce tide
which surged up against them. Yet it would have fared ill with them
had not the archers from either side closed in upon the flanks of the
attackers, and pressed them very slowly and foot by foot down the long
slope, until they were on the plain once more, where their fellows were
already rallying for a fresh assault.

But terrible indeed was the cost at which the last had been repelled.
Of the three hundred and seventy men who had held the crest, one hundred
and seventy-two were left standing, many of whom were sorely wounded and
weak from loss of blood. Sir Oliver Buttesthorn, Sir Richard Causton,
Sir Simon Burley, Black Simon, Johnston, a hundred and fifty archers,
and forty-seven men-at-arms had fallen, while the pitiless hail of
stones was already whizzing and piping once more about their ears,
threatening every instant to further reduce their numbers.

Sir Nigel looked about him at his shattered ranks, and his face flushed
with a soldier's pride.

�By St. Paul!� he cried, �I have fought in many a little bickering, but
never one that I would be more loth to have missed than this. But you
are wounded, Alleyne?�

�It is nought,� answered his squire, stanching the blood which dripped
from a sword-cut across his forehead.

�These gentlemen of Spain seem to be most courteous and worthy people. I
see that they are already forming to continue this debate with us. Form
up the bowmen two deep instead of four. By my faith! some very brave men
have gone from among us. Aylward, you are a trusty soldier, for all
that your shoulder has never felt accolade, nor your heels worn the gold
spurs. Do you take charge of the right; I will hold the centre, and you,
my Lord of Angus, the left.�

�Ho! for Sir Samkin Aylward!� cried a rough voice among the archers, and
a roar of laughter greeted their new leader.

�By my hilt!� said the old bowman, �I never thought to lead a wing in a
stricken field. Stand close, camarades, for, by these finger-bones! we
must play the man this day.�

�Come hither, Alleyne,� said Sir Nigel, walking back to the edge of the
cliff which formed the rear of their position. �And you, Norbury,� he
continued, beckoning to the squire of Sir Oliver, �do you also come
here.�

The two squires hurried across to him, and the three stood looking down
into the rocky ravine which lay a hundred and fifty feet beneath them.

�The prince must hear of how things are with us,� said the knight.
�Another onfall we may withstand, but they are many and we are few, so
that the time must come when we can no longer form line across the hill.
Yet if help were brought us we might hold the crest until it comes. See
yonder horses which stray among the rocks beneath us?�

�I see them, my fair lord.�

�And see yonder path which winds along the hill upon the further end of
the valley?�

�I see it.�

�Were you on those horses, and riding up yonder track, steep and rough
as it is, I think that ye might gain the valley beyond. Then on to the
prince, and tell him how we fare.�

�But, my fair lord, how can we hope to reach the horses?� asked Norbury.

�Ye cannot go round to them, for they would be upon ye ere ye could come
to them. Think ye that ye have heart enough to clamber down this cliff?�

�Had we but a rope.�

�There is one here. It is but one hundred feet long, and for the rest ye
must trust to God and to your fingers. Can you try it, Alleyne?�

�With all my heart, my dear lord, but how can I leave you in such a
strait?�

�Nay, it is to serve me that ye go. And you, Norbury?�

The silent squire said nothing, but he took up the rope, and, having
examined it, he tied one end firmly round a projecting rock. Then he
cast off his breast-plate, thigh pieces, and greaves, while Alleyne
followed his example.

�Tell Chandos, or Calverley, or Knolles, should the prince have gone
forward,� cried Sir Nigel. �Now may God speed ye, for ye are brave and
worthy men.�

It was, indeed, a task which might make the heart of the bravest sink
within him. The thin cord dangling down the face of the brown cliff
seemed from above to reach little more than half-way down it. Beyond
stretched the rugged rock, wet and shining, with a green tuft here and
there thrusting out from it, but little sign of ridge or foothold. Far
below the jagged points of the boulders bristled up, dark and menacing.
Norbury tugged thrice with all his strength upon the cord, and then
lowered himself over the edge, while a hundred anxious faces peered over
at him as he slowly clambered downwards to the end of the rope. Twice he
stretched out his foot, and twice he failed to reach the point at which
he aimed, but even as he swung himself for a third effort a stone from
a sling buzzed like a wasp from amid the rocks and struck him full upon
the side of his head. His grasp relaxed, his feet slipped, and in
an instant he was a crushed and mangled corpse upon the sharp ridges
beneath him.

�If I have no better fortune,� said Alleyne, leading Sir Nigel aside. �I
pray you, my dear lord, that you will give my humble service to the Lady
Maude, and say to her that I was ever her true servant and most unworthy
cavalier.�

The old knight said no word, but he put a hand on either shoulder, and
kissed his squire, with the tears shining in his eyes. Alleyne sprang to
the rope, and sliding swiftly down, soon found himself at its extremity.
From above it seemed as though rope and cliff were well-nigh touching,
but now, when swinging a hundred feet down, the squire found that he
could scarce reach the face of the rock with his foot, and that it was
as smooth as glass, with no resting-place where a mouse could stand.
Some three feet lower, however, his eye lit upon a long jagged crack
which slanted downwards, and this he must reach if he would save not
only his own poor life, but that of the eight-score men above him. Yet
it were madness to spring for that narrow slit with nought but the wet,
smooth rock to cling to. He swung for a moment, full of thought, and
even as he hung there another of the hellish stones sang through his
curls, and struck a chip from the face of the cliff. Up he clambered
a few feet, drew up the loose end after him, unslung his belt, held on
with knee and with elbow while he spliced the long, tough leathern belt
to the end of the cord: then lowering himself as far as he could go, he
swung backwards and forwards until his hand reached the crack, when he
left the rope and clung to the face of the cliff. Another stone struck
him on the side, and he heard a sound like a breaking stick, with a keen
stabbing pain which shot through his chest. Yet it was no time now to
think of pain or ache. There was his lord and his eight-score comrades,
and they must be plucked from the jaws of death. On he clambered, with
his hand shuffling down the long sloping crack, sometimes bearing all
his weight upon his arms, at others finding some small shelf or tuft
on which to rest his foot. Would he never pass over that fifty feet? He
dared not look down and could but grope slowly onwards, his face to
the cliff, his fingers clutching, his feet scraping and feeling for a
support. Every vein and crack and mottling of that face of rock remained
forever stamped upon his memory. At last, however, his foot came upon
a broad resting-place and he ventured to cast a glance downwards. Thank
God! he had reached the highest of those fatal pinnacles upon which his
comrade had fallen. Quickly now he sprang from rock to rock until his
feet were on the ground, and he had his hand stretched out for the
horse's rein, when a sling-stone struck him on the head, and he dropped
senseless upon the ground.

An evil blow it was for Alleyne, but a worse one still for him who
struck it. The Spanish slinger, seeing the youth lie slain, and judging
from his dress that he was no common man, rushed forward to plunder him,
knowing well that the bowmen above him had expended their last shaft.
He was still three paces, however, from his victim's side when John
upon the cliff above plucked up a huge boulder, and, poising it for
an instant, dropped it with fatal aim upon the slinger beneath him. It
struck upon his shoulder, and hurled him, crushed and screaming, to the
ground, while Alleyne, recalled to his senses by these shrill cries in
his very ear, staggered on to his feet, and gazed wildly about him. His
eyes fell upon the horses, grazing upon the scanty pasture, and in an
instant all had come back to him--his mission, his comrades, the need
for haste. He was dizzy, sick, faint, but he must not die, and he must
not tarry, for his life meant many lives that day. In an instant he
was in his saddle and spurring down the valley. Loud rang the swift
charger's hoofs over rock and reef, while the fire flew from the stroke
of iron, and the loose stones showered up behind him. But his head was
whirling round, the blood was gushing from his brow, his temple, his
mouth. Ever keener and sharper was the deadly pain which shot like a
red-hot arrow through his side. He felt that his eye was glazing, his
senses slipping from him, his grasp upon the reins relaxing. Then with
one mighty effort, he called up all his strength for a single minute.
Stooping down, he loosened the stirrup-straps, bound his knees tightly
to his saddle-flaps, twisted his hands in the bridle, and then, putting
the gallant horse's head for the mountain path, he dashed the spurs
in and fell forward fainting with his face buried in the coarse, black
mane.

Little could he ever remember of that wild ride. Half conscious, but
ever with the one thought beating in his mind, he goaded the horse
onwards, rushing swiftly down steep ravines over huge boulders, along
the edges of black abysses. Dim memories he had of beetling cliffs, of a
group of huts with wondering faces at the doors, of foaming, clattering
water, and of a bristle of mountain beeches. Once, ere he had ridden
far, he heard behind him three deep, sullen shouts, which told him that
his comrades had set their faces to the foe once more. Then all was
blank, until he woke to find kindly blue English eyes peering down upon
him and to hear the blessed sound of his country's speech. They were but
a foraging party--a hundred archers and as many men-at-arms--but their
leader was Sir Hugh Calverley, and he was not a man to bide idle when
good blows were to be had not three leagues from him. A scout was sent
flying with a message to the camp, and Sir Hugh, with his two hundred
men, thundered off to the rescue. With them went Alleyne, still bound to
his saddle, still dripping with blood, and swooning and recovering, and
swooning once again. On they rode, and on, until, at last, topping a
ridge, they looked down upon the fateful valley. Alas! and alas! for the
sight that met their eyes.

There, beneath them, was the blood-bathed hill, and from the highest
pinnacle there flaunted the yellow and white banner with the lions and
the towers of the royal house of Castile. Up the long slope rushed ranks
and ranks of men exultant, shouting, with waving pennons and brandished
arms. Over the whole summit were dense throngs of knights, with no enemy
that could be seen to face them, save only that at one corner of the
plateau an eddy and swirl amid the crowded mass seemed to show that all
resistance was not yet at an end. At the sight a deep groan of rage and
of despair went up from the baffled rescuers, and, spurring on their
horses, they clattered down the long and winding path which led to the
valley beneath.

But they were too late to avenge, as they had been too late to save.
Long ere they could gain the level ground, the Spaniards, seeing them
riding swiftly amid the rocks, and being ignorant of their numbers, drew
off from the captured hill, and, having secured their few prisoners,
rode slowly in a long column, with drum-beating and cymbal-clashing, out
of the valley. Their rear ranks were already passing out of sight ere
the new-comers were urging their panting, foaming horses up the slope
which had been the scene of that long drawn and bloody fight.

And a fearsome sight it was that met their eyes! Across the lower end
lay the dense heap of men and horses where the first arrow-storm had
burst. Above, the bodies of the dead and the dying--French, Spanish, and
Aragonese--lay thick and thicker, until they covered the whole ground
two and three deep in one dreadful tangle of slaughter. Above them lay
the Englishmen in their lines, even as they had stood, and higher yet
upon the plateau a wild medley of the dead of all nations, where the
last deadly grapple had left them. In the further corner, under the
shadow of a great rock, there crouched seven bowmen, with great John
in the centre of them--all wounded, weary, and in sorry case, but still
unconquered, with their blood-stained weapons waving and their voices
ringing a welcome to their countrymen. Alleyne rode across to John,
while Sir Hugh Calverley followed close behind him.

�By Saint George!� cried Sir Hugh, �I have never seen signs of so stern
a fight, and I am right glad that we have been in time to save you.�

�You have saved more than us,� said John, pointing to the banner which
leaned against the rock behind him.

�You have done nobly,� cried the old free companion, gazing with a
soldier's admiration at the huge frame and bold face of the archer. �But
why is it, my good fellow, that you sit upon this man.�

�By the rood! I had forgot him,� John answered, rising and dragging
from under him no less a person than the Spanish caballero, Don Diego
Alvarez. �This man, my fair lord, means to me a new house, ten cows,
one bull--if it be but a little one--a grindstone, and I know not what
besides; so that I thought it well to sit upon him, lest he should take
a fancy to leave me.�

�Tell me, John,� cried Alleyne faintly: �where is my dear lord, Sir
Nigel Loring?�

�He is dead, I fear. I saw them throw his body across a horse and ride
away with it, but I fear the life had gone from him.�

�Now woe worth me! And where is Aylward?�

�He sprang upon a riderless horse and rode after Sir Nigel to save him.
I saw them throng around him, and he is either taken or slain.�

�Blow the bugles!� cried Sir Hugh, with a scowling brow. �We must back
to camp, and ere three days I trust that we may see these Spaniards
again. I would fain have ye all in my company.�

�We are of the White Company, my fair lord,� said John.

�Nay, the White Company is here disbanded,� answered Sir Hugh solemnly,
looking round him at the lines of silent figures. �Look to the brave
squire, for I fear that he will never see the sun rise again.�



CHAPTER XXXVIII. OF THE HOME-COMING TO HAMPSHIRE.


It was a bright July morning four months after that fatal fight in the
Spanish barranca. A blue heaven stretched above, a green rolling plain
undulated below, intersected with hedge-rows and flecked with grazing
sheep. The sun was yet low in the heaven, and the red cows stood in the
long shadow of the elms, chewing the cud and gazing with great vacant
eyes at two horsemen who were spurring it down the long white road which
dipped and curved away back to where the towers and pinnacles beneath
the flat-topped hill marked the old town of Winchester.

Of the riders one was young, graceful, and fair, clad in plain doublet
and hosen of blue Brussels cloth, which served to show his active and
well-knit figure. A flat velvet cap was drawn forward to keep the glare
from his eyes, and he rode with lips compressed and anxious face, as one
who has much care upon his mind. Young as he was, and peaceful as
was his dress, the dainty golden spurs which twinkled upon his heels
proclaimed his knighthood, while a long seam upon his brow and a
scar upon his temple gave a manly grace to his refined and delicate
countenance. His comrade was a large, red-headed man upon a great black
horse, with a huge canvas bag slung from his saddle-bow, which jingled
and clinked with every movement of his steed. His broad, brown face was
lighted up by a continual smile, and he looked slowly from side to
side with eyes which twinkled and shone with delight. Well might John
rejoice, for was he not back in his native Hampshire, had he not Don
Diego's five thousand crowns rasping against his knee, and above all was
he not himself squire now to Sir Alleyne Edricson, the young Socman of
Minstead lately knighted by the sword of the Black Prince himself, and
esteemed by the whole army as one of the most rising of the soldiers of
England.

For the last stand of the Company had been told throughout Christendom
wherever a brave deed of arms was loved, and honors had flowed in upon
the few who had survived it. For two months Alleyne had wavered betwixt
death and life, with a broken rib and a shattered head; yet youth and
strength and a cleanly life were all upon his side, and he awoke from
his long delirium to find that the war was over, that the Spaniards
and their allies had been crushed at Navaretta, and that the prince had
himself heard the tale of his ride for succor and had come in person to
his bedside to touch his shoulder with his sword and to insure that so
brave and true a man should die, if he could not live, within the order
of chivalry. The instant that he could set foot to ground Alleyne had
started in search of his lord, but no word could he hear of him, dead
or alive, and he had come home now sad-hearted, in the hope of raising
money upon his estates and so starting upon his quest once more. Landing
at London, he had hurried on with a mind full of care, for he had heard
no word from Hampshire since the short note which had announced his
brother's death.

�By the rood!� cried John, looking around him exultantly, �where have we
seen since we left such noble cows, such fleecy sheep, grass so green,
or a man so drunk as yonder rogue who lies in the gap of the hedge?�

�Ah, John,� Alleyne answered wearily, �it is well for you, but I never
thought that my home-coming would be so sad a one. My heart is heavy for
my dear lord and for Aylward, and I know not how I may break the news to
the Lady Mary and to the Lady Maude, if they have not yet had tidings of
it.�

John gave a groan which made the horses shy. �It is indeed a black
business,� said he. �But be not sad, for I shall give half these crowns
to my old mother, and half will I add to the money which you may have,
and so we shall buy that yellow cog wherein we sailed to Bordeaux, and
in it we shall go forth and seek Sir Nigel.�

Alleyne smiled, but shook his head. �Were he alive we should have had
word of him ere now,� said he. �But what is this town before us?�

�Why, it is Romsey!� cried John. �See the tower of the old gray church,
and the long stretch of the nunnery. But here sits a very holy man, and
I shall give him a crown for his prayers.�

Three large stones formed a rough cot by the roadside, and beside it,
basking in the sun, sat the hermit, with clay-colored face, dull eyes,
and long withered hands. With crossed ankles and sunken head, he sat
as though all his life had passed out of him, with the beads slipping
slowly through his thin, yellow fingers. Behind him lay the narrow cell,
clay-floored and damp, comfortless, profitless and sordid. Beyond it
there lay amid the trees the wattle-and-daub hut of a laborer, the
door open, and the single room exposed to the view. The man ruddy and
yellow-haired, stood leaning upon the spade wherewith he had been at
work upon the garden patch. From behind him came the ripple of a happy
woman's laughter, and two young urchins darted forth from the hut,
bare-legged and towsy, while the mother, stepping out, laid her hand
upon her husband's arm and watched the gambols of the children. The
hermit frowned at the untoward noise which broke upon his prayers, but
his brow relaxed as he looked upon the broad silver piece which John
held out to him.

�There lies the image of our past and of our future,� cried Alleyne, as
they rode on upon their way. �Now, which is better, to till God's earth,
to have happy faces round one's knee, and to love and be loved, or
to sit forever moaning over one's own soul, like a mother over a sick
babe?�

�I know not about that,� said John, �for it casts a great cloud over me
when I think of such matters. But I know that my crown was well spent,
for the man had the look of a very holy person. As to the other, there
was nought holy about him that I could see, and it would be cheaper for
me to pray for myself than to give a crown to one who spent his days in
digging for lettuces.�

Ere Alleyne could answer there swung round the curve of the road a
lady's carriage drawn by three horses abreast with a postilion upon
the outer one. Very fine and rich it was, with beams painted and gilt,
wheels and spokes carved in strange figures, and over all an arched
cover of red and white tapestry. Beneath its shade there sat a stout
and elderly lady in a pink cote-hardie, leaning back among a pile of
cushions, and plucking out her eyebrows with a small pair of silver
tweezers. None could seem more safe and secure and at her ease than this
lady, yet here also was a symbol of human life, for in an instant, even
as Alleyne reined aside to let the carriage pass, a wheel flew out
from among its fellows, and over it all toppled--carving, tapestry
and gilt--in one wild heap, with the horses plunging, the postilion
shouting, and the lady screaming from within. In an instant Alleyne and
John were on foot, and had lifted her forth all in a shake with fear,
but little the worse for her mischance.

�Now woe worth me!� she cried, �and ill fall on Michael Easover of
Romsey! for I told him that the pin was loose, and yet he must needs
gainsay me, like the foolish daffe that he is.�

�I trust that you have taken no hurt, my fair lady,� said Alleyne,
conducting her to the bank, upon which John had already placed a
cushion.

�Nay, I have had no scath, though I have lost my silver tweezers. Now,
lack-a-day! did God ever put breath into such a fool as Michael Easover
of Romsey? But I am much beholden to you, gentle sirs. Soldiers ye are,
as one may readily see. I am myself a soldier's daughter,� she added,
casting a somewhat languishing glance at John, �and my heart ever goes
out to a brave man.�

�We are indeed fresh from Spain,� quoth Alleyne.

�From Spain, say you? Ah! it was an ill and sorry thing that so many
should throw away the lives that Heaven gave them. In sooth, it is bad
for those who fall, but worse for those who bide behind. I have but now
bid farewell to one who hath lost all in this cruel war.�

�And how that, lady?�

�She is a young damsel of these parts, and she goes now into a nunnery.
Alack! it is not a year since she was the fairest maid from Avon to
Itchen, and now it was more than I could abide to wait at Romsey Nunnery
to see her put the white veil upon her face, for she was made for a wife
and not for the cloister. Did you ever, gentle sir, hear of a body of
men called 'The White Company' over yonder?�

�Surely so,� cried both the comrades.

�Her father was the leader of it, and her lover served under him as
squire. News hath come that not one of the Company was left alive, and
so, poor lamb, she hath----�

�Lady!� cried Alleyne, with catching breath, �is it the Lady Maude
Loring of whom you speak?�

�It is, in sooth.�

�Maude! And in a nunnery! Did, then, the thought of her father's death
so move her?�

�Her father!� cried the lady, smiling. �Nay; Maude is a good daughter,
but I think it was this young golden-haired squire of whom I have heard
who has made her turn her back upon the world.�

�And I stand talking here!� cried Alleyne wildly. �Come, John, come!�

Rushing to his horse, he swung himself into the saddle, and was off down
the road in a rolling cloud of dust as fast as his good steed could bear
him.

Great had been the rejoicing amid the Romsey nuns when the Lady Maude
Loring had craved admission into their order--for was she not sole child
and heiress of the old knight, with farms and fiefs which she could
bring to the great nunnery? Long and earnest had been the talks of the
gaunt lady abbess, in which she had conjured the young novice to turn
forever from the world, and to rest her bruised heart under the broad
and peaceful shelter of the church. And now, when all was settled, and
when abbess and lady superior had had their will, it was but fitting
that some pomp and show should mark the glad occasion. Hence was it that
the good burghers of Romsey were all in the streets, that gay flags and
flowers brightened the path from the nunnery to the church, and that a
long procession wound up to the old arched door leading up the bride to
these spiritual nuptials. There was lay-sister Agatha with the high gold
crucifix, and the three incense-bearers, and the two-and-twenty garbed
in white, who cast flowers upon either side of them and sang sweetly the
while. Then, with four attendants, came the novice, her drooping head
wreathed with white blossoms, and, behind, the abbess and her council of
older nuns, who were already counting in their minds whether their own
bailiff could manage the farms of Twynham, or whether a reeve would be
needed beneath him, to draw the utmost from these new possessions which
this young novice was about to bring them.

But alas! for plots and plans when love and youth and nature, and above
all, fortune are arrayed against them. Who is this travel-stained youth
who dares to ride so madly through the lines of staring burghers? Why
does he fling himself from his horse and stare so strangely about
him? See how he has rushed through the incense-bearers, thrust aside
lay-sister Agatha, scattered the two-and-twenty damosels who sang so
sweetly--and he stands before the novice with his hands out-stretched,
and his face shining, and the light of love in his gray eyes. Her foot
is on the very lintel of the church, and yet he bars the way--and she,
she thinks no more of the wise words and holy rede of the lady abbess,
but she hath given a sobbing cry and hath fallen forward with his arms
around her drooping body and her wet cheek upon his breast. A sorry
sight this for the gaunt abbess, an ill lesson too for the stainless
two-and-twenty who have ever been taught that the way of nature is the
way of sin. But Maude and Alleyne care little for this. A dank, cold
air comes out from the black arch before them. Without, the sun shines
bright and the birds are singing amid the ivy on the drooping beeches.
Their choice is made, and they turn away hand-in-hand, with their backs
to the darkness and their faces to the light.

Very quiet was the wedding in the old priory church at Christchurch,
where Father Christopher read the service, and there were few to see
save the Lady Loring and John, and a dozen bowmen from the castle. The
Lady of Twynham had drooped and pined for weary months, so that her face
was harsher and less comely than before, yet she still hoped on, for her
lord had come through so many dangers that she could scarce believe that
he might be stricken down at last. It had been her wish to start for
Spain and to search for him, but Alleyne had persuaded her to let him
go in her place. There was much to look after, now that the lands of
Minstead were joined to those of Twynham, and Alleyne had promised her
that if she would but bide with his wife he would never come back to
Hampshire again until he had gained some news, good or ill, of her lord
and lover.

The yellow cog had been engaged, with Goodwin Hawtayne in command, and a
month after the wedding Alleyne rode down to Bucklershard to see if she
had come round yet from Southampton. On the way he passed the fishing
village of Pitt's Deep, and marked that a little creyer or brig was
tacking off the land, as though about to anchor there. On his way back,
as he rode towards the village, he saw that she had indeed anchored, and
that many boats were round her, bearing cargo to the shore.

A bow-shot from Pitt's Deep there was an inn a little back from the
road, very large and wide-spread, with a great green bush hung upon a
pole from one of the upper windows. At this window he marked, as he rode
up, that a man was seated who appeared to be craning his neck in his
direction. Alleyne was still looking up at him, when a woman came
rushing from the open door of the inn, and made as though she would
climb a tree, looking back the while with a laughing face. Wondering
what these doings might mean, Alleyne tied his horse to a tree, and
was walking amid the trunks towards the inn, when there shot from the
entrance a second woman who made also for the trees. Close at her heels
came a burly, brown-faced man, who leaned against the door-post and
laughed loudly with his hand to his side, �Ah, mes belles!� he cried,
�and is it thus you treat me? Ah, mes petites! I swear by these
finger-bones that I would not hurt a hair of your pretty heads; but I
have been among the black paynim, and, by my hilt! it does me good to
look at your English cheeks. Come, drink a stoup of muscadine with me,
mes anges, for my heart is warm to be among ye again.�

At the sight of the man Alleyne had stood staring, but at the sound of
his voice such a thrill of joy bubbled up in his heart that he had
to bite his lip to keep himself from shouting outright. But a deeper
pleasure yet was in store. Even as he looked, the window above was
pushed outwards, and the voice of the man whom he had seen there came
out from it. �Aylward,� cried the voice, �I have seen just now a very
worthy person come down the road, though my eyes could scarce discern
whether he carried coat-armor. I pray you to wait upon him and tell him
that a very humble knight of England abides here, so that if he be in
need of advancement, or have any small vow upon his soul, or desire to
exalt his lady, I may help him to accomplish it.�

Aylward at this order came shuffling forward amid the trees, and in an
instant the two men were clinging in each other's arms, laughing and
shouting and patting each other in their delight; while old Sir Nigel
came running with his sword, under the impression that some small
bickering had broken out, only to embrace and be embraced himself,
until all three were hoarse with their questions and outcries and
congratulations.

On their journey home through the woods Alleyne learnt their
wondrous story: how, when Sir Nigel came to his senses, he with his
fellow-captive had been hurried to the coast, and conveyed by sea to
their captor's castle; how upon the way they had been taken by a Barbary
rover, and how they exchanged their light captivity for a seat on a
galley bench and hard labor at the pirate's oars; how, in the port at
Barbary, Sir Nigel had slain the Moorish captain, and had swum with
Aylward to a small coaster which they had taken, and so made their way
to England with a rich cargo to reward them for their toils. All this
Alleyne listened to, until the dark keep of Twynham towered above them
in the gloaming, and they saw the red sun lying athwart the rippling
Avon. No need to speak of the glad hearts at Twynham Castle that night,
nor of the rich offerings from out that Moorish cargo which found their
way to the chapel of Father Christopher.

Sir Nigel Loring lived for many years, full of honor and laden with
every blessing. He rode no more to the wars, but he found his way to
every jousting within thirty miles; and the Hampshire youth treasured
it as the highest honor when a word of praise fell from him as to their
management of their horses, or their breaking of their lances. So he
lived and so he died, the most revered and the happiest man in all his
native shire.

For Sir Alleyne Edricson and for his beautiful bride the future had also
naught but what was good. Twice he fought in France, and came back each
time laden with honors. A high place at court was given to him, and
he spent many years at Windsor under the second Richard and the fourth
Henry--where he received the honor of the Garter, and won the name of
being a brave soldier, a true-hearted gentleman, and a great lover and
patron of every art and science which refines or ennobles life.

As to John, he took unto himself a village maid, and settled in
Lyndhurst, where his five thousand crowns made him the richest franklin
for many miles around. For many years he drank his ale every night at
the �Pied Merlin,� which was now kept by his friend Aylward, who had
wedded the good widow to whom he had committed his plunder. The strong
men and the bowmen of the country round used to drop in there of an
evening to wrestle a fall with John or to shoot a round with Aylward;
but, though a silver shilling was to be the prize of the victory, it has
never been reported that any man earned much money in that fashion.
So they lived, these men, in their own lusty, cheery fashion--rude and
rough, but honest, kindly and true. Let us thank God if we have outgrown
their vices. Let us pray to God that we may ever hold their virtues. The
sky may darken, and the clouds may gather, and again the day may come
when Britain may have sore need of her children, on whatever shore of
the sea they be found. Shall they not muster at her call?

UNCLE BERNAC

CHAPTER I


THE COAST OF FRANCE

I dare say that I had already read my uncle's letter a hundred times,
and I am sure that I knew it by heart.  None the less I took it out of
my pocket, and, sitting on the side of the lugger, I went over it again
with as much attention as if it were for the first time.  It was written
in a prim, angular hand, such as one might expect from a man who had
begun life as a village attorney, and it was addressed to Louis de
Laval, to the care of William Hargreaves, of the Green Man in Ashford,
Kent.  The landlord had many a hogshead of untaxed French brandy from
the Normandy coast, and the letter had found its way by the same hands.

'My dear nephew Louis,' said the letter, 'now that your father is dead,
and that you are alone in the world, I am sure that you will not wish to
carry on the feud which has existed between the two halves of the
family.  At the time of the troubles your father was drawn towards the
side of the King, and I towards that of the people, and it ended, as you
know, by his having to fly from the country, and by my becoming the
possessor of the estates of Grosbois.  No doubt it is very hard that you
should find yourself in a different position to your ancestors, but I am
sure that you would rather that the land should be held by a Bernac than
by a stranger.  From the brother of your mother you will at least always
meet with sympathy and consideration.

'And now I have some advice for you.  You know that I have always been
a Republican, but it has become evident to me that there is no use in
fighting against fate, and that Napoleon's power is far too great to be
shaken.  This being so, I have tried to serve him, for it is well to
howl when you are among wolves.  I have been able to do so much for
him that he has become my very good friend, so that I may ask him what
I like in return.  He is now, as you are probably aware, with the army
at Boulogne, within a few miles of Grosbois.  If you will come over at
once he will certainly forget the hostility of your father in
consideration of the services of your uncle.  It is true that your name
is still proscribed, but my influence with the Emperor will set that
matter right.  Come to me, then, come at once, and come with confidence.
                                      'Your uncle,
                                          'C. BERNAC.'

So much for the letter, but it was the outside which had puzzled me
most.  A seal of red wax had been affixed at either end, and my uncle
had apparently used his thumb as a signet.  One could see the little
rippling edges of a coarse skin imprinted upon the wax.  And then above
one of the seals there was written in English the two words, 'Don't
come.'  It was hastily scrawled, and whether by a man or a woman it was
impossible to say; but there it stared me in the face, that sinister
addition to an invitation.

'Don't come!'  Had it been added by this unknown uncle of mine on
account of some sudden change in his plans? Surely that was
inconceivable, for why in that case should he send the invitation at
all?  Or was it placed there by some one else who wished to warn me from
accepting this offer of hospitality?  The letter was in French.  The
warning was in English.  Could it have been added in England?  But the
seals were unbroken, and how could any one in England know what were the
contents of the letter?

And then, as I sat there with the big sail humming like a shell above my
head and the green water hissing beside me, I thought over all that I
had heard of this uncle of mine.  My father, the descendant of one of
the proudest and oldest families in France, had chosen beauty and virtue
rather than rank in his wife.  Never for an hour had she given him cause
to regret it; but this lawyer brother of hers had, as I understood,
offended my father by his slavish obsequiousness in days of prosperity
and his venomous enmity in the days of trouble.  He had hounded on the
peasants until my family had been compelled to fly from the country, and
had afterwards aided Robespierre in his worst excesses, receiving as a
reward the castle and estate of Grosbois, which was our own.  At the
fall of Robespierre he had succeeded in conciliating Barras, and through
every successive change he still managed to gain a fresh tenure of the
property.  Now it appeared from his letter that the new Emperor of
France had also taken his part, though why he should befriend a man with
such a history, and what service my Republican uncle could possibly
render to him, were matters upon which I could form no opinion.

And now you will ask me, no doubt, why I should accept the invitation
of such a man--a man whom my father had always stigmatised as a usurper
and a traitor.  It is easier to speak of it now than then, but the fact
was that we of the new generation felt it very irksome and difficult to
carry on the bitter quarrels of the last.  To the older _emigres_ the
clock of time seemed to have stopped in the year 1792, and they remained
for ever with the loves and the hatreds of that era fixed indelibly upon
their souls.  They had been burned into them by the fiery furnace
through which they had passed.  But we, who had grown up upon a strange
soil, understood that the world had moved, and that new issues had
arisen.  We were inclined to forget these feuds of the last generation.
France to us was no longer the murderous land of the _sans-culotte_ and
the guillotine basket; it was rather the glorious queen of war, attacked
by all and conquering all, but still so hard pressed that her scattered
sons could hear her call to arms for ever sounding in their ears.  It
was that call more than my uncle's letter which was taking me over the
waters of the Channel.

For long my heart had been with my country in her struggle, and yet
while my father lived I had never dared to say so; for to him, who had
served under Conde and fought at Quiberon, it would have seemed the
blackest treason.  But after his death there was no reason why I should
not return to the land of my birth, and my desire was the stronger
because Eugenie--the same Eugenie who has been thirty years my wife--was
of the same way of thinking as myself.  Her parents were a branch of the
de Choiseuls, and their prejudices were even stronger than those of my
father.  Little did they think what was passing in the minds of their
children.  Many a time when they were mourning a French victory in the
parlour we were both capering with joy in the garden.  There was a
little window, all choked round with laurel bushes, in the corner of the
bare brick house, and there we used to meet at night, the dearer to each
other from our difference with all who surrounded us.  I would tell her
my ambitions; she would strengthen them by her enthusiasm.  And so all
was ready when the time came.

But there was another reason besides the death of my father and the
receipt of this letter from my uncle.  Ashford was becoming too hot to
hold me.  I will say this for the English, that they were very generous
hosts to the French emigrants.  There was not one of us who did not
carry away a kindly remembrance of the land and its people.  But in
every country there are overbearing, swaggering folk, and even in quiet,
sleepy Ashford we were plagued by them.  There was one young Kentish
squire, Farley was his name, who had earned a reputation in the town as
a bully and a roisterer.  He could not meet one of us without uttering
insults not merely against the present French Government, which might
have been excusable in an English patriot, but against France itself and
all Frenchmen.  Often we were forced to be deaf in his presence, but at
last his conduct became so intolerable that I determined to teach him a
lesson.  There were several of us in the coffee-room at the Green Man
one evening, and he, full of wine and malice, was heaping insults upon
the French, his eyes creeping round to me every moment to see how I was
taking it.  'Now, Monsieur de Laval,' he cried, putting his rude hand
upon my shoulder, 'here is a toast for you to drink.  This is to the
arm of Nelson which strikes down the French.'  He stood leering at me to
see if I would drink it.  'Well, sir,' said I, 'I will drink your toast
if you will drink mine in return.' 'Come on, then!' said he.  So we
drank.  'Now, monsieur, let us have your toast,' said he.  'Fill your
glass, then,' said I.  'It is full now.' 'Well, then, here's to the
cannon-ball which carried off that arm!'  In an instant I had a glass of
port wine running down my face, and within an hour a meeting had been
arranged.  I shot him through the shoulder, and that night, when I came
to the little window, Eugenie plucked off some of the laurel leaves and
stuck them in my hair.

There were no legal proceedings about the duel, but it made my position
a little difficult in the town, and it will explain, with other things,
why I had no hesitation in accepting my unknown uncle's invitation, in
spite of the singular addition which I found upon the cover.  If he had
indeed sufficient influence with the Emperor to remove the proscription
which was attached to our name, then the only barrier which shut me off
from my country would be demolished.

You must picture me all this time as sitting upon the side of the lugger
and turning my prospects and my position over in my head.  My reverie
was interrupted by the heavy hand of the English skipper dropping
abruptly upon my arm.

'Now then, master,' said he, it's time you were stepping into the
dingey.'

I do not inherit the politics of the aristocrats, but I have never lost
their sense of personal dignity.  I gently pushed away his polluting
hand, and I remarked that we were still a long way from the shore.

'Well, you can do as you please,' said he roughly; 'I'm going no nearer,
so you can take your choice of getting into the dingey or of swimming
for it.'

It was in vain that I pleaded that he had been paid his price.  I did
not add that that price meant that the watch which had belonged to three
generations of de Lavals was now lying in the shop of a Dover goldsmith.

'Little enough, too!' he cried harshly.  'Down sail, Jim, and bring her
to!  Now, master, you can step over the side, or you can come back to
Dover, but I don't take the Vixen a cable's length nearer to Ambleteuse
Beef with this gale coming up from the sou'-west.'

'In that case I shall go,' said I.

'You can lay your life on that!' he answered, and laughed in so
irritating a fashion that I half turned upon him with the intention of
chastising him.  One is very helpless with these fellows, however, for a
serious affair is of course out of the question, while if one uses a
cane upon them they have a vile habit of striking with their hands,
which gives them an advantage.  The Marquis de Chamfort told me that,
when he first settled in Sutton at the time of the emigration, he lost a
tooth when reproving an unruly peasant.  I made the best of a necessity,
therefore, and, shrugging my shoulders, I passed over the side of the
lugger into the little boat.  My bundle was dropped in after me--conceive
to yourself the heir of all the de Lavals travelling with a
single bundle for his baggage!--and two seamen pushed her off, pulling
with long slow strokes towards the low-lying shore.

There was certainly every promise of a wild night, for the dark cloud
which had rolled up over the setting sun was now frayed and ragged at
the edges, extending a good third of the way across the heavens.  It had
split low down near the horizon, and the crimson glare of the sunset
beat through the gap, so that there was the appearance of fire with a
monstrous reek of smoke.  A red dancing belt of light lay across the
broad slate-coloured ocean, and in the centre of it the little black
craft was wallowing and tumbling.  The two seamen kept looking up at the
heavens, and then over their shoulders at the land, and I feared every
moment that they would put back before the gale burst.  I was filled
with apprehension every time when the end of their pull turned their
faces skyward, and it was to draw their attention away from the
storm-drift that I asked them what the lights were which had begun to
twinkle through the dusk both to the right and to the left of us.

'That's Boulogne to the north, and Etaples upon the south,' said one of
the seamen civilly.

Boulogne!  Etaples!  How the words came back to me!  It was to Boulogne
that in my boyhood we had gone down for the summer bathing.  Could I not
remember as a little lad trotting along by my father's side as he paced
the beach, and wondering why every fisherman's cap flew off at our
approach?  And as to Etaples, it was thence that we had fled for
England, when the folks came raving to the pier-head as we passed, and I
joined my thin voice to my father's as he shrieked back at them, for a
stone had broken my mother's knee, and we were all frenzied with our
fear and our hatred.  And here they were, these places of my childhood,
twinkling to the north and south of me, while there, in the darkness
between them, and only ten miles off at the furthest, lay my own castle,
my own land of Grosbois, where the men of my blood had lived and died
long before some of us had gone across with Duke William to conquer the
proud island over the water.  How I strained my eager eyes through the
darkness as I thought that the distant black keep of our fortalice might
even now be visible!

'Yes, sir,' said the seaman, ''tis a fine stretch of lonesome coast, and
many is the cock of your hackle that I have helped ashore there.'

'What do you take me for, then?' I asked.

'Well, 'tis no business of mine, sir,' he answered.  'There are some
trades that had best not even be spoken about.'

'You think that I am a conspirator?'

'Well, master, since you have put a name to it.  Lor' love you, sir,
we're used to it.'

'I give you my word that I am none.'

'An escaped prisoner, then?'

'No, nor that either.'

The man leaned upon his oar, and I could see in the gloom that his face
was thrust forward, and that it was wrinkled with suspicion.

'If you're one of Boney's spies--' he cried.

'I! A spy!' The tone of my voice was enough to convince him.

'Well,' said he,' I'm darned if I know what you are.  But if you'd been
a spy I'd ha' had no hand in landing you, whatever the skipper might
say.'

'Mind you, I've no word to say against Boney,' said the other seaman,
speaking in a very thick rumbling voice.  'He's been a rare good friend
to the poor mariner.'

It surprised me to hear him speak so, for the virulence of feeling
against the new French Emperor in England exceeded all belief, and high
and low were united in their hatred of him; but the sailor soon gave me
a clue to his politics.

'If the poor mariner can run in his little bit of coffee and sugar, and
run out his silk and his brandy, he has Boney to thank for it,' said he.
'The merchants have had their spell, and now it's the turn of the poor
mariner.'

I remembered then that Buonaparte was personally very popular amongst
the smugglers, as well he might be, seeing that he had made over into
their hands all the trade of the Channel.  The seaman continued to pull
with his left hand, but he pointed with his right over the
slate-coloured dancing waters.

'There's Boney himself,' said he.

You who live in a quieter age cannot conceive the thrill which these
simple words sent through me.  It was but ten years since we had first
heard of this man with the curious Italian name--think  of it, ten
years, the time that it takes for a private to become a non-commissioned
officer, or a clerk to win a fifty-pound advance in his salary.  He had
sprung in an instant out of nothing into everything.  One month people
were asking who he was, the next he had broken out in the north of Italy
like the plague; Venice and Genoa withered at the touch of this swarthy
ill-nourished boy.  He cowed the soldiers in the field, and he outwitted
the statesmen in the council chamber.  With a frenzy of energy he rushed
to the east, and then, while men were still marvelling at the way in
which he had converted Egypt into a French department, he was back again
in Italy and had beaten Austria for the second time to the earth.  He
travelled as quickly as the rumour of his coming; and where he came
there were new victories, new combinations, the crackling of old systems
and the blurring of ancient lines of frontier.  Holland, Savoy,
Switzerland--they were become mere names upon the map.  France was
eating into Europe in every direction.  They had made him Emperor, this
beardless artillery officer, and without an effort he had crushed down
those Republicans before whom the oldest king and the proudest nobility
of Europe had been helpless.  So it came about that we, who watched him
dart from place to place like the shuttle of destiny, and who heard his
name always in connection with some new achievement and some new
success, had come at last to look upon him as something more than human,
something monstrous, overshadowing France and menacing Europe.  His
giant presence loomed over the continent, and so deep was the impression
which his fame had made in my mind that, when the English sailor pointed
confidently over the darkening waters, and cried 'There's Boney!' I
looked up for the instant with a foolish expectation of seeing some
gigantic figure, some elemental creature, dark, inchoate, and
threatening, brooding over the waters of the Channel.  Even now, after
the long gap of years and the knowledge of his downfall, that great man
casts his spell upon you, but all that you read and all that you hear
cannot give you an idea of what his name meant in the days when he was
at the summit of his career.

What actually met my eye was very different from this childish
expectation of mine.  To the north there was a long low cape, the name
of which has now escaped me.  In the evening light it had been of the
same greyish green tint as the other headlands; but now, as the darkness
fell, it gradually  broke into a dull glow, like a cooling iron.
On that wild night, seen and lost with the heave and sweep of the boat,
this lurid streak carried with it a vague but sinister suggestion.
The red line splitting the darkness might have been a giant half-forged
sword-blade with its point towards England.

'What is it, then?' I asked.

'Just what I say, master,' said he.  'It's one of Boney's armies, with
Boney himself in the middle of it as like as not.  Them is their camp
fires, and you'll see a dozen such between this and Ostend.
He's audacious enough to come across, is little Boney, if he could dowse
Lord Nelson's other eye; but there's no chance for him until then, and
well he knows it.'

'How can Lord Nelson know what he is doing?' I asked.

The man pointed out over my shoulder into the darkness, and far on the
horizon I perceived three little twinkling lights.

'Watch dog,' said he, in his husky voice.

'Andromeda.  Forty-four,' added his companion.

I have often thought of them since, the long glow upon the land, and the
three little lights upon the sea, standing for so much, for the two
great rivals face to face, for the power of the land and the power of
the water, for the centuries-old battle, which may last for centuries to
come.  And yet, Frenchman as I am, do I not know that the struggle is
already decided?--for it lies between the childless nation and that
which has a lusty young brood springing up around her.  If France falls
she dies, but if England falls how many nations are there who will carry
her speech, her traditions and her blood on into the history of the
future?

The land had been looming darker, and the thudding of waves upon the
sand sounded louder every instant upon my ears.  I could already see the
quick dancing gleam of the surf in front of me.  Suddenly, as I peered
through the deepening shadow, a long dark boat shot out from it, like a
trout from under a stone, making straight in our direction.

'A guard boat!' cried one of the seamen.

'Bill, boy, we're done!' said the other, and began to stuff something
into his sea boot.

But the boat swerved at the sight of us, like a shying horse, and was
off in another direction as fast as eight frantic oars could drive her.
The seamen stared after her and wiped their brows.  'Her conscience
don't seem much easier than our own,' said one of them.  'I made sure it
was the preventives.'

'Looks to me as if you weren't the only queer cargo on the coast
to-night, mister,' remarked his comrade.  'What could she be?'

'Cursed if I know what she was.  I rammed a cake of good Trinidad
tobacco into my boot when I saw her.  I've seen the inside of a French
prison before now.  Give way, Bill, and have it over.'

A minute later, with a low grating sound, we ran aground upon a gravelly
leach.  My bundle was thrown ashore, I stepped after it, and a seaman
pushed the prow off again, springing in as his comrade backed her into
deep water.  Already the glow in the west had vanished, the storm-cloud
was half up the heavens, and a thick blackness had gathered over the
ocean.  As I turned to watch the vanishing boat a keen wet blast flapped
in my face, and the air was filled with the high piping of the wind and
with the deep thunder of the sea.

And thus it was that, on a wild evening in the early spring of the year
1805, I, Louis de Laval, being in the twenty-first year of my age,
returned, after an exile of thirteen years, to the country of which my
family had for many centuries been the ornament and support.  She had
treated us badly, this country; she had repaid our services by insult,
exile, and confiscation.  But all that was forgotten as I, the only de
Laval of the new generation, dropped upon my knees upon her sacred soil,
and, with the strong smell of the seaweed in my nostrils, pressed my
lips upon the wet and pringling gravel.



CHAPTER II


THE SALT-MARSH

When a man has reached his mature age he can rest at that point of
vantage, and cast his eyes back at the long road along which he has
travelled, lying with its gleams of sunshine and its stretches of shadow
in the valley behind him.  He knows then its whence and its whither, and
the twists and bends which were so full of promise or of menace as he
approached them lie exposed and open to his gaze.  So plain is it all
that he can scarce remember how dark it may have seemed to him, or how
long he once hesitated at the cross roads.  Thus when he tries to recall
each stage of the journey he does so with the knowledge of its end, and
can no longer make it clear, even to himself, how it may have seemed to
him at the time.  And yet, in spite of the strain of years, and the many
passages which have befallen me since, there is no time of my life which
comes back so very clearly as that gusty evening, and to this day I
cannot feel the briny wholesome whiff of the seaweed without being
carried back, with that intimate feeling of reality which only the sense
of smell can confer, to the wet shingle of the French beach.

When I had risen from my knees, the first thing that I did was to put my
purse into the inner pocket of my coat.  I had taken it out in order to
give a gold piece to the sailor who had handed me ashore, though I have
little doubt that the fellow was both wealthier and of more assured
prospects than myself.  I had actually drawn out a silver half-crown,
but I could not bring myself to offer it to him, and so ended by giving
a tenth part of my whole fortune to a stranger.  The other nine
sovereigns I put very carefully away, and then, sitting down upon a flat
rock just above high water mark, I turned it all over in my mind and
weighed what I should do.  Already I was cold and hungry, with the wind
lashing my face and the spray smarting in my eyes, but at least I was no
longer living upon the charity of the enemies of my country, and the
thought set my heart dancing within me.  But the castle, as well as I
could remember, was a good ten miles off.  To go there now was to arrive
at an unseemly hour, unkempt and weather-stained, before this uncle whom
I had never seen.  My sensitive pride conjured up a picture of the
scornful faces of his servants as they looked out upon this bedraggled
wanderer from England slinking back to the castle which should have been
his own.  No, I must seek shelter for the night, and then at my leisure,
with as fair a show of appearances as possible, I must present myself
before my relative.  Where then could I find a refuge from the storm?

You will ask me, doubtless, why I did not make for Etaples or Boulogne.
I answer that it was for the same reason which forced me to land
secretly upon that forbidding coast.  The name of de Laval still headed
the list of the proscribed, for my father had been a famous and
energetic leader of the small but influential body of men who had
remained true at all costs to the old order of things.  Do not think
that, because I was of another way of thinking, I despised those who had
given up so much for their principles.  There is a curious saint-like
trait in our natures which draws us most strongly towards that which
involves the greatest sacrifice, and I have sometimes thought that if
the conditions had been less onerous the Bourbons might have had fewer,
or at least less noble, followers.  The French nobles had been more
faithful to them than the English to the Stuarts, for Cromwell had no
luxurious court or rich appointments which he could hold out to those
who would desert the royal cause.  No words can exaggerate the
self-abnegation of those men.  I have seen a supper party under my
father's roof where our guests were two fencing-masters, three
professors of language, one ornamental gardener, and one translator of
books, who held his hand in the front of his coat to conceal a rent in
the lapel.  But these eight men were of the highest nobility of France,
who might have had what they chose to ask if they would only consent to
forget the past, and to throw themselves heartily into the new order of
things.  But the humble, and what is sadder the incapable, monarch of
Hartwell still held the allegiance of those old Montmorencies, Rohans,
and Choiseuls, who, having shared the greatness of his family, were
determined also to stand by it in its ruin.  The dark chambers of that
exiled monarch were furnished with something better than the tapestry of
Gobelins or the china of Sevres.  Across the gulf which separates my old
age from theirs I can still see those ill-clad, grave-mannered men, and
I raise my hat to the noblest group of nobles that our history can show.

To visit a coast-town, therefore, before I had seen my uncle, or learnt
whether my return had been sanctioned, would be simply to deliver myself
into the hands of the _gens d'armes_, who were ever on the look-out for
strangers from England.  To go before the new Emperor was one thing and
to be dragged before him another.  On the whole, it seemed to me that my
best course was to wander inland, in the hope of finding some empty barn
or out-house, where I could pass the night unseen and undisturbed.  Then
in the morning I should consider how it was best for me to approach my
uncle Bernac, and through him the new master of France.

The wind had freshened meanwhile into a gale, and it was so dark upon
the seaward side that I could only catch the white flash of a leaping
wave here and there in the blackness.  Of the lugger which had brought
me from Dover I could see no sign.  On the land side of me there seemed,
as far as I could make it out, to be a line of low hills, but when I
came to traverse them I found that the dim light had exaggerated their
size, and that they were mere scattered sand-dunes, mottled with patches
of bramble.  Over these I toiled with my bundle slung over my shoulder,
plodding heavily through the loose sand, and tripping over the creepers,
but forgetting my wet clothes and my numb hands as I recalled the many
hardships and adventures which my ancestors had undergone.  It amused me
to think that the day might come when my own descendants might fortify
themselves by the recollection of that which was happening to me, for in
a great family like ours the individual is always subordinate to the
race.

It seemed to me that I should never get to the end of the sand-dunes,
but when at last I did come off them I heartily wished that I was back
upon them again; for the sea in that part comes by some creek up the
back of the beach, forming at low tide a great desolate salt-marsh,
which must be a forlorn place even in the daytime, but upon such a night
as that it was a most dreary wilderness.  At first it was but a softness
of the ground, causing me to slip as I walked, but soon the mud was over
my ankles and half-way up to my knees, so that each foot gave a loud
flop as I raised it, and a dull splash as I set it down again.  I would
willingly have made my way out, even if I had to return to the
sand-dunes, but in trying to pick my path I had lost all my bearings,
and the air was so full of the sounds of the storm that the sea seemed
to be on every side of me.  I had heard of how one may steer oneself by
observation of the stars, but my quiet English life had not taught me
how such things were done, and had I known I could scarcely have
profited by it, since the few stars which were visible peeped out here
and there in the rifts of the flying storm-clouds.  I wandered on then,
wet and weary, trusting to fortune, but always blundering deeper and
deeper into this horrible bog, until I began to think that my first
night in France was destined also to be my last, and that the heir of
the de Lavals was destined to perish of cold and misery in the depths of
this obscene morass.

I must have toiled for many miles in this dreary fashion, sometimes
coming upon shallower mud and sometimes upon deeper, but never making my
way on to the dry, when I perceived through the gloom something which
turned my heart even heavier than it had been before.  This was a
curious clump of some whitish shrub--cotton-grass of a flowering
variety--which glimmered suddenly before me in the darkness.  Now, an
hour earlier I had passed just such a square-headed, whitish clump; so
that I was confirmed in the opinion which I had already begun to form,
that I was wandering in a circle.  To make it certain I stooped down,
striking a momentary flash from my tinder-box, and there sure enough was
my own old track very clearly marked in the brown mud in front of me.
At this confirmation of my worst fears I threw my eyes up to heaven in
my despair, and there I saw something which for the first time gave me a
clue in the uncertainty which surrounded me.

It was nothing else than a glimpse of the moon between two flowing
clouds.  This in itself might have been of small avail to me, but over
its white face was marked a long thin V, which shot swiftly across like
a shaftless arrow.  It was a flock of wild ducks, and its flight was in
the same direction as that towards which my face was turned.  Now, I had
observed in Kent how all these creatures come further inland when there
is rough weather breaking, so I made no doubt that their course
indicated the path which would lead me away from the sea.  I struggled
on, therefore, taking every precaution to walk in a straight line, above
all being very careful to make a stride of equal length with either leg,
until at last, after half an hour or so, my perseverance was rewarded by
the welcome sight of a little yellow light, as from a cottage window,
glimmering through the darkness.  Ah, how it shone through my eyes and
down into my heart, glowing and twinkling there, that little golden
speck, which meant food, and rest, and life itself to the wanderer!
I blundered towards it through the mud and the slush as fast as my weary
legs would bear me.  I was too cold and miserable to refuse any shelter,
and I had no doubt that for the sake of one of my gold pieces the
fisherman or peasant who lived in this strange situation would shut his
eyes to whatever might be suspicious in my presence or appearance.

As I approached it became more and more wonderful to me that any one
should live there at all, for the bog grew worse rather than better, and
in the occasional gleams of moonshine I could make out that the water
lay in glimmering pools all round the low dark cottage from which the
light was breaking.  I could see now that it shone through a small
square window.  As I approached the gleam was suddenly obscured, and
there in a yellow frame appeared the round black outline of a man's head
peering out into the darkness.  A second time it appeared before I
reached the cottage, and there was something in the stealthy manner in
which it peeped and whisked away, and peeped once more, which filled me
with surprise, and with a certain vague apprehension.

So cautious were the movements of this sentinel, and so singular the
position of his watch-house, that I determined, in spite of my misery,
to see something more of him before I trusted myself to the shelter of
his roof.  And, indeed, the amount of shelter which I might hope for was
not very great, for as I drew softly nearer I could see that the light
from within was beating through at several points, and that the whole
cottage was in the most crazy state of disrepair.  For a moment I
paused, thinking that even the salt-marsh might perhaps be a safer
resting-place for the night than the headquarters of some desperate
smuggler, for such I conjectured that this lonely dwelling must be.
The scud, however, had covered the moon once more, and the darkness was
so pitchy black that I felt that I might reconnoitre a little more
closely without fear of discovery.  Walking on tiptoe I approached the
little window and looked in.

What I saw reassured me vastly.  A small wood fire was crackling in one
of those old-fashioned country grates, and beside it was seated a
strikingly handsome young man, who was reading earnestly out of a fat
little book.  He had an oval, olive-tinted face, with long black hair,
ungathered in a queue, and there was something of the poet or of the
artist in his whole appearance.  The sight of that refined face, and of
the warm yellow firelight which beat upon it, was a very cheering one to
a cold and famished traveller.  I stood for an instant gazing at him,
and noticing the way in which his full and somewhat loose-fitting lower
lip quivered continually, as if he were repeating to himself that which
he was reading.  I was still looking at him when he put his book down
upon the table and approached the window.  Catching a glimpse of my
figure in the darkness he called out something which I could not hear,
and waved his hand in a gesture of welcome.  An instant later the door
flew open, and there was his thin tall figure standing upon the
threshold, with his skirts flapping in the wind.

'My dear friends,' he cried, peering out into the gloom with his hand
over his eyes to screen them from the salt-laden wind and driving sand,
'I had given you up.  I thought that you were never coming.  I've been
waiting for two hours.'

For answer I stepped out in front of him, so that the light fell upon my
face.

'I am afraid, sir--' said I.

But I had no time to finish my sentence.  He struck at me with both
hands like an angry cat, and, springing back into the room, he slammed
the door with a crash in my face.

The swiftness of his movements and the malignity of his gesture were in
such singular contrast with his appearance that I was struck speechless
with surprise.  But as I stood there with the door in front of me I was
a witness to something which filled me with even greater astonishment.

I have already said that the cottage was in the last stage of disrepair.
Amidst the many seams and cracks through which the light was breaking
there was one along the whole of the hinge side of the door, which gave
me from where I was standing a view of the further end of the room, at
which the fire was burning.  As I gazed then I saw this man reappear in
front of the fire, fumbling furiously with both his hands in his bosom,
and then with a spring he disappeared up the chimney, so that I could
only see his shoes and half of his black calves as he stood upon the
brickwork at the side of the grate.  In an instant he was down again and
back at the door.

'Who are you?' he cried, in a voice which seemed to me to be thrilling
with some strong emotion.

'I am a traveller, and have lost my way.'  There was a pause as if he
were thinking what  course he should pursue.

'You will find little here to tempt you to stay,' said he at last.

'I am weary and spent, sir; and surely you will not refuse me shelter.
I have been wandering for hours in the salt-marsh.'

'Did you meet anyone there?' he asked eagerly.

'No.'

'Stand back a little from the door.  This is a wild place, and the times
are troublous.  A man must take some precautions.'

I took a few steps back, and he then opened the door sufficiently to
allow his head to come through.  He said nothing, but he looked at me
for a long time in a very searching manner.

'What is your name?'

'Louis Laval,' said I, thinking that it might sound less dangerous in
this plebeian form.

'Whither are you going?'

'I wish to reach some shelter.'

'You are from England?'

'I am from the coast.'

He shook his head slowly to show me how little my replies had satisfied
him.

'You cannot come in here,' said he.

'But surely--'

'No, no, it is impossible.'

'Show me then how to find my way out of the marsh.'

'It is easy enough.  If you go a few hundred paces in that direction you
will perceive the lights of a village.  You are already almost free of
the marsh.'

He stepped a pace or two from the door in order to point the way for me,
and then turned upon his heel.  I had already taken a stride or two away
from him and his inhospitable hut, when he suddenly called after me.

'Come, Monsieur Laval,' said he, with quite a different ring in his
voice; 'I really cannot permit you to leave me upon so tempestuous a
night.  A warm by my fire and a glass of brandy will hearten you upon
your way.'

You may think that I did not feel disposed to contradict him, though I
could make nothing of this sudden and welcome change in his manner.

'I am much obliged to you, sir,' said I.

And I followed him into the hut.



CHAPTER III


THE RUINED COTTAGE

It was delightful to see the glow and twinkle of the fire and to escape
from the wet wind and the numbing cold, but my curiosity had already
risen so high about this lonely man and his singular dwelling that my
thoughts ran rather upon that than upon my personal comfort.  There was
his remarkable appearance, the fact that he should be awaiting company
within that miserable ruin in the heart of the morass at so sinister an
hour, and finally the inexplicable incident of the chimney, all of which
excited my imagination.  It was beyond my comprehension why he should at
one moment charge me sternly to continue my journey, and then, in almost
the same breath, invite me most cordially to seek the shelter of his
hut.  On all these points I was keenly on the alert for an explanation.
Yet I endeavoured to conceal my feelings, and to assume the air of a man
who finds everything quite natural about him, and who is much too
absorbed in his own personal wants to have a thought to spare upon
anything outside himself.

A glance at the inside of the cottage, as I entered, confirmed me in the
conjecture which the appearance of the outside had already given rise
to, that it was not used for human residence, and that this man was only
here for a rendezvous.  Prolonged moisture had peeled the plaster in
flakes from the walls, and had covered the stones with blotches and
rosettes of lichen.  The whole place was rotten and scaling like a
leper.  The single large room was unfurnished save for a crazy table,
three wooden boxes, which might be used as seats, and a great pile of
decayed fishing-net in the corner.  The splinters of a fourth box, with
a hand-axe, which leaned against the wall, showed how the wood for the
fire had been gathered.  But it was to the table that my gaze was
chiefly drawn, for there, beside the lamp and the book, lay an open
basket, from which projected the knuckle-end of a ham, the corner of a
loaf of bread, and the black neck of a bottle.

If my host had been suspicious and cold at our first meeting he was now
atoning for his inhospitality by an overdone cordiality even harder for
me to explain.  With many lamentations over my mud-stained and sodden
condition, he drew a box close to the blaze and cut me off a corner of
the bread and ham.  I could not help observing, however, that though his
loose under-lipped mouth was wreathed with smiles, his beautiful dark
eyes were continually running over me and my attire, asking and
re-asking what my business might be.

'As for myself,' said he, with an air of false candour, 'you will very
well understand that in these days a worthy merchant must do the best he
can to get his wares, and if the Emperor, God save him, sees fit in his
wisdom to put an end to open trade, one must come to such places as
these to get into touch with those who bring across the coffee and the
tobacco.  I promise you that in the Tuileries itself there is no
difficulty about getting either one or the other, and the Emperor drinks
his ten cups a day of the real Mocha without asking questions, though he
must know that it is not grown within the confines of France.  The
vegetable kingdom still remains one of the few which Napoleon has not
yet conquered, and, if it were not for traders, who are at some risk and
inconvenience, it is hard to say what we should do for our supplies.
I suppose, sir, that you are not yourself either in the seafaring or in
the trading line?'

I contented myself by answering that I was not, by which reticence I
could see that I only excited his curiosity the more.  As to his account
of himself, I read a lie in those tell-tale eyes all the time that he
was talking.  As I looked at him now in the full light of the lamp and
the fire, I could see that he was even more good-looking than I had at
first thought, but with a type of beauty which has never been to my
taste.  His features were so refined as to be almost effeminate, and so
regular that they would have been perfect if it had not been for that
ill-fitting, slabbing mouth.  It was a clever, and yet it was a weak
face, full of a sort of fickle enthusiasm and feeble impulsiveness.
I felt that the more I knew him the less reason I should probably find
either to like him or to fear him, and in my first conclusion I was
right, although I had occasion to change my views upon the second.

'You will forgive me, Monsieur Laval, if I was a little cold at first,'
said he.  'Since the Emperor has been upon the coast the place swarms
with police agents, so that a trader must look to his own interests.
You will allow that my fears of you were not unnatural, since neither
your dress nor your appearance were such as one would expect to meet
with in such a place and at such a time.'

It was on my lips to return the remark, but I refrained.

'I can assure you,' said I, 'that I am merely a traveller who have lost
my way.  Now that I am refreshed and rested I will not encroach further
upon your hospitality, except to ask you to point out the way to the
nearest village.'

'Tut; you had best stay where you are, for the night grows wilder every
instant.'  As he spoke there came a whoop and scream of wind in the
chimney, as if the old place were coming down about our ears.  He walked
across to the window and looked very earnestly out of it, just as I had
seen him do upon my first approach.  'The fact is, Monsieur Laval,' said
he, looking round at me with his false-air of good fellowship, 'you may
be of some good service to me if you will wait here for half an hour or
so.'

'How so?' I asked, wavering between my distrust and my curiosity.

'Well, to be frank with you'--and never did a man look less frank as he
spoke--'I am waiting here for some of those people with whom I do
business;  but in some way they have not come yet, and I am inclined to
take a walk round the marsh on the chance of finding them, if they have
lost their way.  On the other hand, it would be exceedingly awkward for
me if they were to come here in my absence and imagine that I am gone.
I should take it as a favour, then, if you would remain here for half an
hour or so, that you may tell them how matters stand if I should chance
to miss them.'

The request seemed reasonable enough, and yet there was that same
oblique glance which told me that it was false.  Still, I could not see
what harm could come to me by complying with his request, and certainly
I could not have devised any arrangement which would give me such an
opportunity of satisfying my curiosity.  What was in that wide stone
chimney, and why had he clambered up there upon the sight of me?
My adventure would be inconclusive indeed if I did not settle that point
before I went on with my journey.

'Well,' said he, snatching up his black broad-brimmed hat and running
very briskly to the door, 'I am sure that you will not refuse me my
request, and I must delay no longer or I shall never get my business
finished.'  He closed the door hurriedly behind him, and I heard the
splashing of his foot-steps until they were lost in the howling of the
gale.

And so the mysterious cottage was mine to ransack if I could pluck its
secrets from it.  I lifted the book which had been left upon the table.
It was Rousseau's 'Social Contract'--excellent literature, but hardly
what one would expect a trader to carry with him whilst awaiting an
appointment with smugglers.  On the fly-leaf was written 'Lucien
Lesage,' and beneath it, in a woman's hand, 'Lucien, from Sibylle.'
Lesage, then, was the name of my good-looking but sinister acquaintance.
It only remained for me now to discover what it was which he had
concealed up the chimney.  I listened intently, and as there was no
sound from without save the cry of the storm, I stepped on to the edge
of the grate as I had seen him do, and sprang up by the side of the
fire.

It was a very broad, old-fashioned cottage chimney, so that standing on
one side I was not inconvenienced either by the heat or by the smoke,
and the bright glare from below showed me in an instant that for which I
sought.  There was a recess at the back, caused by the fall or removal
of one of the stones, and in this was lying a small bundle.  There could
not be the least doubt that it was this which the fellow had striven so
frantically to conceal upon the first alarm of the approach of a
stranger.  I took it down and held it to the light.  It was a small
square of yellow glazed cloth tied round with white tape.  Upon my
opening it a number of letters appeared, and a single large paper folded
up.  The addresses upon the letters took my breath away.  The first that
I glanced at was to Citizen Talleyrand.  The others were in the
Republican style addressed to Citizen Fouche, to Citizen Soult, to
Citizen MacDonald, to Citizen Berthier, and so on through the whole list
of famous names in war and in diplomacy who were the pillars of the new
Empire.  What in the world could this pretended merchant of coffee have
to write to all these great notables about?  The other paper would
explain, no doubt.  I laid the letters upon the shelf and I unfolded the
paper which had been enclosed with them.  It did not take more than the
opening sentence to convince me that the salt-marsh outside might prove
to be a very much safer place than this accursed cottage.

These were the words which met my eyes:--

'Fellow-citizens of France.  The deed of to-day has proved that, even in
the midst of his troops, a tyrant is unable to escape the vengeance of
an outraged people.  The committee of three, acting temporarily for the
Republic, has awarded to Buonaparte the same fate which has already
befallen Louis Capet.  In avenging the outrage of the 18th Brumaire--'

So far I had got when my heart sprang suddenly into my mouth and the
paper fluttered down from my fingers.  A grip of iron had closed
suddenly round each of my ankles, and there in the light of the fire I
saw two hands which, even in that terrified glance, I perceived to be
covered with black hair and of an enormous size.

'So, my friend,' cried a thundering voice, 'this time, at least, we have
been too many for you.'



CHAPTER IV


MEN OF THE NIGHT

I had little time given me to realise the extraordinary and humiliating
position in which I found myself, for I was lifted up by my ankles, as
if I were a fowl pulled off a perch, and jerked roughly down into the
room, my back striking upon the stone floor with a thud which shook the
breath from my body.

'Don't kill him yet, Toussac,' said a soft voice.  'Let us make sure who
he is first.'

I felt the pressure of a thumb upon my chin and of fingers upon my
throat, and my head was slowly forced round until the strain became
unbearable.

'Quarter of an inch does it and no mark,' said the thunderous voice.
'You can trust my old turn.'

'Don't, Toussac; don't!' said the same gentle voice which had spoken
first.  'I saw you do it once before, and the horrible snick that it
made haunted me for a long time.  To think that the sacred flame of life
can be so readily snuffed out by that great material finger and thumb!
Mind can indeed conquer matter, but the fighting must not be at close
quarters.'

My neck was so twisted that I could not see any of these people who were
discussing my fate.  I could only lie and listen.

'The fact remains, my dear Charles, that the fellow has our
all-important secret, and that it is our lives or his.

'I recognised in the voice which was now speaking that of the man of the
cottage.

'We owe it to ourselves to put it out of his power to harm us.  Let him
sit up, Toussac, for there is no possibility of his escaping.'

Some irresistible force at the back of my neck dragged me instantly into
a sitting position, and so for the first time I was able to look round
me in a dazed fashion, and to see these men into whose hands I had
fallen.  That they were murderers in the past and had murderous plans
for the future I already gathered from what I had heard and seen.
I understood also that in the heart of that lonely marsh I was
absolutely in their power.  None the less, I remembered the name that I
bore, and I concealed as far as I could the sickening terror which lay
at my heart.

There were three of them in the room, my former acquaintance and two new
comers.  Lesage stood by the table, with his fat brown book in his hand,
looking at me with a composed face, but with that humorous questioning
twinkle in his eyes which a master chess-player might assume when he had
left his opponent without a move.  On the top of the box beside him sat
a very ascetic-faced, yellow, hollow-eyed man of fifty, with prim lips
and a shrunken skin, which hung loosely over the long jerking tendons
under his prominent chin.  He was dressed in snuff-coloured clothes, and
his legs under his knee-breeches were of a ludicrous thinness.  He shook
his head at me with an air of sad wisdom, and I could read little
comfort in his inhuman grey eyes.  But it was the man called Toussac who
alarmed me most.  He was a colossus; bulky rather than tall, but
misshapen from his excess of muscle.  His huge legs were crooked like
those of a great ape; and, indeed, there was something animal about his
whole appearance, something for he was bearded up to his eyes, and it
was a paw rather than a hand which still clutched me by the collar.  As
to his expression, he was too thatched with hair to show one, but his
large black eyes looked with a sinister questioning from me to the
others.  If they were the judge and jury, it was clear who was to be
executioner.

'Whence did he come?  What is his business?  How came he to know the
hiding-place?'  asked the thin man.

'When he first came I mistook him for you in the darkness,' Lesage
answered.  'You will acknowledge that it was not a night on which one
would expect to meet many people in the salt-marsh.  On discovering my
mistake I shut the door and concealed the papers in the chimney.  I had
forgotten that he might see me do this through that crack by the hinges,
but when I went out again, to show him his way and so get rid of him, my
eye caught the gap, and I at once realised that he had seen my action,
and that it must have aroused his curiosity to such an extent that it
would be quite certain that he would think and speak of it.  I called
him back into the hut, therefore, in order that I might have time to
consider what I had best do with him.'

'Sapristi! a couple of cuts of that wood-axe, and a bed in the softest
corner of the marsh, would have settled the business at once,' said the
fellow by my side.

'Quite true, my good Toussac; but it is not usual to lead off with your
ace of trumps.  A little delicacy--a little finesse--'

'Let us hear what you did then?'

'It was my first object to learn whether this man Laval--'

'What did you say his name was?' cried the thin man.

'His name, according to his account, is Laval.  My first object then was
to find out whether he had in truth seen me conceal the papers or not.
It was an important question for us, and, as things have turned out,
more important still for him.  I made my little plan, therefore.
I waited until I saw you approach, and I then left him alone in the hut.
I watched through the window and saw him fly to the hiding-place.
We then entered, and I asked you, Toussac, to be good enough to lift him
down--and there he lies.'

The young fellow looked proudly round for the applause of his comrades,
and the thin man clapped his hands softly together, looking very hard at
me while he did so.

'My dear Lesage,' said he, 'you have certainly excelled yourself.
When our new republic looks for its minister of police we shall know
where to find him.  I confess that when, after guiding Toussac to this
shelter, I followed you in and perceived a gentleman's legs projecting
from the fireplace, even my wits, which are usually none of the slowest,
hardly grasped the situation.  Toussac, however, grasped the legs.
He is always practical, the good Toussac.'

'Enough words!' growled the hairy creature beside me.  'It is because we
have talked instead of acting that this Buonaparte has a crown upon his
head or a head upon his shoulders.  Let us have done with the fellow and
come to business.'

The refined features of Lesage made me look towards him as to a possible
protector, but his large dark eyes were as cold and hard as jet as he
looked back at me.

'What Toussac says is right,' said he.  'We imperil our own safety if he
goes with our secret.'

'The devil take our own safety!' cried Toussac.  'What has that to do
with the matter?  We imperil the success of our plans--that is of more
importance.'

'The two things go together,' replied Lesage.  'There is no doubt that
Rule 13 of our confederation defines exactly what should be done in
such a case.  Any responsibility must rest with the passers of Rule 13.'

My heart had turned cold when this man with his poet's face supported
the savage at my side.  But my hopes were raised again when the thin
man, who had said little hitherto, though he had continued to stare at
me very intently, began now to show some signs of alarm at the
bloodthirsty proposals of his comrades.

'My dear Lucien,' said he, in a soothing voice, laying his hand upon the
young man's arm, 'we philosophers and reasoners must have a respect for
human life.  The tabernacle is not to be lightly violated.  We have
frequently agreed that if it were not for the excesses of Marat--'

'I have every respect for your opinion, Charles,' the other interrupted.
'You will allow that I have always been a willing and obedient disciple.
But I again say that our personal safety is involved, and that, as far
as I see, there is no middle course.  No one could be more averse from
cruelty than I am, but you were present with me some months ago when
Toussac silenced the man from Bow Street, and certainly it was done with
such dexterity that the process was probably more painful to the
spectators than to the victim.  He could not have been aware of the
horrible sound which announced his own dissolution.  If you and I had
constancy enough to endure this--and if I remember right it was chiefly
at your instigation that the deed was done--then surely on this more
vital occasion--'

'No, no, Toussac, stop!' cried the thin man, his voice rising from its
soft tones to a perfect scream as the giant's hairy hand gripped me by
the chin once more.  'I appeal to you, Lucien, upon practical as well as
upon moral grounds, not to let this deed be done.  Consider that if
things should go against us this will cut us off from all hopes of
mercy.  Consider also--'

This argument seemed for a moment to stagger the younger man, whose
olive complexion had turned a shade greyer.

'There will be no hope for us in any case, Charles,' said he.  'We have
no choice but to obey Rule 13.'

'Some latitude is allowed to us.  We are ourselves upon the inner
committee.'

'But it takes a quorum to change a rule, and we have no powers to do
it.'  His pendulous lip was quivering, but there was no softening in his
eyes.  Slowly under the pressure of those cruel fingers my chin began to
sweep round to my shoulder, and I commended my soul to the Virgin and to
Saint Ignatius, who has always been the especial patron of my family.
But this man Charles, who had already befriended me, darted forwards and
began to tear at Toussac's hands with a vehemence which was very
different from his former philosophic calm.

'You _shall_ not kill him!' he cried angrily.

'Who are you, to set your wills up against mine?  Let him go, Toussac!
Take your thumb from his chin!  I won't have it done, I tell you!'
Then, as he saw by the inflexible faces of his companions that
blustering would not help him, he turned suddenly to tones of entreaty.
'See, now! I'll make you a promise!' said he.  'Listen to me, Lucien!
Let me examine him!  If he is a police spy he shall die!  You may have
him then, Toussac.  But if he is only a harmless traveller, who has
blundered in here by an evil chance, and who has been led by a foolish
curiosity to inquire into our business, then you will leave him to me.'

You will observe that from the beginning of this affair I had never once
opened my mouth, nor said a word in my defence, which made me mightily
pleased with myself afterwards, though my silence came rather from pride
than from courage.  To lose life and self-respect together was more than
I could face.  But now, at this appeal from my advocate, I turned my
eyes from the monster who held me to the other who condemned me.
The brutality of the one alarmed me less than the self-interested
attitude of the other, for a man is never so dangerous as when he is
afraid, and of all judges the judge who has cause to fear you is the
most inflexible.

My life depended upon the answer which was to come to the appeal of my
champion.  Lesage tapped his fingers upon his teeth, and smiled
indulgently at the earnestness of his companion.

'Rule 13!  Rule 13!' he kept repeating, in that exasperating voice of
his.

'I will take all responsibility.'

'I'll tell you what, mister,' said Toussac, in his savage voice.
'There's another rule besides Rule 13, and that's the one that says that
if any man shelters an offender he shall be treated as if he was himself
guilty of the offence.'

This attack did not shake the serenity of my champion in the least.

'You are an excellent man of action, Toussac,' said he calmly; 'but when
it comes to choosing the right course, you must leave it to wiser heads
than your own.'

His air of tranquil superiority seemed to daunt the fierce creature who
held me.  He shrugged his huge shoulders in silent dissent.

'As to you, Lucien,' my friend continued, 'I am surprised, considering
the position to which you aspire in my family, that you should for an
instant stand in the way of any wish which I may express.  If you have
grasped the true principles of liberty, and if you are privileged to be
one of the small band who have never despaired of the republic, to whom
is it that you owe it?'

'Yes, yes, Charles; I acknowledge what you say,' the young man answered,
with much agitation.  'I am sure that I should be the last to oppose any
wish which you might express, but in this case I fear lest your
tenderness of heart may be leading you astray.  By all means ask him any
questions that you like; but it seems to me that there can be only one
end to the matter.'

So I thought also; for, with the full secret of these desperate men in
my possession, what hope was there that they would ever suffer me to
leave the hut alive?  And yet, so sweet is human life, and so dear a
respite, be it ever so short a one, that when that murderous hand was
taken from my chin I heard a sudden chiming of little bells, and the
lamp blazed up into a strange fantastic blur.  It was but for a moment,
and then my mind was clear again, and I was looking up at the strange
gaunt face of my examiner.

'Whence have you come?' he asked.

'From England.'

'But you are French?'

'Yes.'

'When did you arrive?'

'To-night.'

'How?'

'In a lugger from Dover.'

'The fellow is speaking the truth,' growled Toussac.  'Yes, I'll say
that for him, that he is speaking the truth.  We saw the lugger, and
someone was landed from it just after the boat that brought me over
pushed off.'

I remembered that boat, which had been the first thing which I had seen
upon the coast of France.  How little I had thought what it would mean
to me!

And now my advocate began asking questions--vague, useless questions--in
a slow, hesitating fashion which set Toussac grumbling.  This
cross-examination appeared to me to be a useless farce; and yet there
was a certain eagerness and intensity in my questioner's manner which
gave me the assurance that he had some end in view.  Was it merely that
he wished to gain time?  Time for what?  And then, suddenly, with that
quick perception which comes upon those whose nerves are strained by an
extremity of danger, I became convinced that he really was awaiting
something--that he was tense with expectation.  I read it upon his drawn
face, upon his sidelong head with his ear scooped into his hand, above
all in his twitching, restless eyes.  He expected an interruption, and
he was talking, talking, talking, in order to gain time for it.  I was
as sure of it as if he had whispered his secret in my ear, and down in
my numb, cold heart a warm little spring of hope began to bubble and
run.

But Toussac had chafed at all this word-fencing, and now with an oath he
broke in upon our dialogue.

'I have had enough of this!' he cried.  'It is not for child's play of
this sort that I risked my head in coming over here.  Have we nothing
better to talk about than this fellow?  Do you suppose I came from
London to listen to your fine phrases?  Have done with it, I say, and
get to business.'

'Very good,' said my champion.  'There's an excellent little cupboard
here which makes as fine a prison as one could wish for.  Let us put him
in here, and pass on to business.  We can deal with him when we have
finished.'

'And have him overhear all that we say,' said Lesage.

'I don't know what the devil has come over you,' cried Toussac, turning
suspicious eyes upon my protector.  'I never knew you squeamish before,
and certainly you were not backward in the affair of the man from Bow
Street.  This fellow has our secret, and he must either die, or we shall
see him at our trial.  What is the sense of arranging a plot, and then
at the last moment turning a man loose who will ruin us all?  Let us
snap his neck and have done with it.'

The great hairy hands were stretched towards me again, but Lesage had
sprung suddenly to his feet.  His face had turned very white, and he
stood listening with his forefinger up and his head slanted.  It was a
long, thin, delicate hand, and it was quivering like a leaf in the wind.

'I heard something,' he whispered.

'And I,' said the older man.

'What was it?'

'Silence.  Listen!'

For a minute or more we all stayed with straining ears while the wind
still whimpered in the chimney or rattled the crazy window.

'It was nothing,' said Lesage at last, with a nervous laugh.
'The storm makes curious sounds sometimes.'

'I heard nothing,' said Toussac.

'Hush!' cried the other.  'There it is again!'

A clear rising cry floated high above the wailing of the storm; a wild,
musical cry, beginning on a low note, and thrilling swiftly up to a
keen, sharp-edged howl.

'A hound!'

'They are following us!'

Lesage dashed to the fireplace, and I saw him thrust his papers into the
blaze and grind them down with his heel.

Toussac seized the wood-axe which leaned against the wall.  The thin man
dragged the pile of decayed netting from the corner, and opened a small
wooden screen, which shut off a low recess.

'In here,' he whispered, 'quick!'

And then, as I scrambled into my refuge, I heard him say to the others
that I would be safe there, and that they could lay their hands upon me
when they wished.



CHAPTER V


THE LAW

The cupboard--for it was little more--into which I had been hurried was
low and narrow, and I felt in the darkness that it was heaped with
peculiar round wickerwork baskets, the nature of which I could by no
means imagine, although I discovered afterwards that they were lobster
traps.  The only light which entered was through the cracks of the old
broken door, but these were so wide and numerous that I could see the
whole of the room which I had just quitted.  Sick and faint, with the
shadow of death still clouding my wits, I was none the less fascinated
by the scene which lay before me.

My thin friend, with the same prim composure upon his emaciated face,
had seated himself again upon the box.  With his hands clasped round one
of his knees he was rocking slowly backwards and forwards; and I
noticed, in the lamplight, that his jaw muscles were contracting
rhythmically, like the gills of a fish.  Beside him stood Lesage, his
white face glistening with moisture and his loose lip quivering with
fear.  Every now and then he would make a vigorous attempt to compose
his features, but after each rally a fresh wave of terror would sweep
everything before it, and set him shaking once more.   As to Toussac, he
stood before the fire, a magnificent figure, with the axe held down by
his leg, and his head thrown back in defiance, so that his great black
beard bristled straight out in front of him.  He said not a word, but
every fibre of his body was braced for a struggle.  Then, as the howl of
the hound rose louder and clearer from the marsh outside, he ran forward
and threw open the door.

'No, no, keep the dog out!' cried Lesage in an agony of apprehension.

'You fool, our only chance is to kill it.'

'But it is in leash.'

'If it is in leash nothing can save us.  But if, as I think, it is
running free, then we may escape yet.'

Lesage cowered up against the table, with his agonised eyes fixed upon
the blue-black square of the door.  The man who had befriended me still
swayed his body about with a singular half-smile upon his face.  His
skinny hand was twitching at the frill of his shirt, and I conjectured
that he held some weapon concealed there.  Toussac stood between them
and the open door, and, much as I feared and loathed him, I could not
take my eyes from his gallant figure.  As to myself, I was so much
occupied by the singular drama before me, and by the impending fate of
those three men of the cottage, that all thought of my own fortunes had
passed completely out of my mind.  On this mean stage a terrible
all-absorbing drama was being played, and I, crouching in a squalid
recess, was to be the sole spectator of it.  I could but hold my breath
and wait and watch.

And suddenly I became conscious that they could all three see something
which was invisible to me.  I read it from their tense faces and their
staring eyes.  Toussac swung his axe over his shoulder and poised
himself for a blow.  Lesage cowered away and put one hand between his
eyes and the open door.  The other ceased swinging his spindle legs and
sat like a little brown image upon the edge of his box.  There was a
moist pattering of feet, a yellow streak shot through the doorway, and
Toussac lashed at it as I have seen an English cricketer strike at a
ball.  His aim was true, for he buried the head of the hatchet in the
creature's throat, but the force of his blow shattered his weapon, and
the weight of the hound carried him backwards on to the floor.  Over
they rolled and over, the hairy man and the hairy dog, growling and
worrying in a bestial combat.  He was fumbling at the animal's throat,
and I could not see what he was doing, until it gave a sudden sharp yelp
of pain, and there was a rending sound like the tearing of canvas.
The man staggered up with his hands dripping, and the tawny mass with
the blotch of crimson lay motionless upon the floor.

'Now!' cried Toussac in a voice of thunder, 'now!' and he rushed from
the hut.

Lesage had shrunk away into the corner in a frenzy of fear whilst
Toussac had been killing the hound, but now he raised his agonised face,
which was as wet as if he had dipped it into a basin.

'Yes, yes,' he cried; 'we must fly, Charles.  The hound has left the
police behind, and we may still escape.'

But the other, with the same imperturbable face, motionless save for the
rhythm of his jaw muscles, walked quietly over and closed the door upon
the inside.

'I think, friend Lucien,' said he in his quiet voice, 'that you had best
stay where you are.'

Lesage looked at him with amazement gradually replacing terror upon his
pallid features.

'But you do not understand, Charles,' he cried.

'Oh, yes, I think I do,' said the other, smiling.

'They may be here in a few minutes.  The hound has slipped its leash,
you see, and has left them behind in the marsh; but they are sure to
come here, for there is no other cottage but this.'

'They are sure to come here.'

'Well, then, let us fly.  In the darkness we may yet escape.'

'No; we shall stay where we are.'

'Madman, you may sacrifice your own life, but not mine.  Stay if you
wish, but for my part I am going.'

He ran towards the door with a foolish, helpless flapping of his hands,
but the other sprang in front of him with so determined a gesture of
authority that the younger man staggered back from it as from a blow.

'You fool!' said his companion.  'You poor miserable dupe!'

Lesage's mouth opened, and he stood staring with his knees bent and his
spread-fingered hands up, the most hideous picture of fear that I have
ever seen.

'You, Charles, you!' he stammered, hawking up each word.

'Yes, me,' said the other, smiling grimly.

'A police agent all the time!  You who were the very soul of our
society! You who were in our inmost council!  You who led us on!
Oh, Charles, you have not the heart!  I think I hear them coming,
Charles.  Let me pass; I beg and implore you to let me pass.'

The granite face shook slowly from side to side.

'But why me?  Why not Toussac?'

'If the dog had crippled Toussac, why then I might have had you both.
But friend Toussac is rather vigorous for a thin little fellow like me.
No, no, my good Lucien, you are destined to be the trophy of my bow and
my spear, and you must reconcile yourself to the fact.'

Lesage slapped his forehead as if to assure himself that he was not
dreaming.

'A police agent!' he repeated, 'Charles a police agent!'

'I thought it would surprise you.'

'But you were the most republican of us all.  We were none of us
advanced enough for you.  How often have we gathered round you, Charles,
to listen to your philosophy!  And there is Sibylle, too!  Don't tell me
that Sibylle was a police spy also.  But you are joking, Charles.
Say that you are joking!'

The man relaxed his grim features, and his eyes puckered with amusement.

'Your astonishment is very flattering,' said he.  'I confess that I
thought that I played my part rather cleverly.  It is not my fault that
these bunglers unleashed their hound, but at least I shall have the
credit of having made a single-handed capture of one very desperate and
dangerous conspirator.'  He smiled drily at this description of his
prisoner.  'The Emperor knows how to reward his friends,' he added,
'and also how to punish his enemies.'

All this time he had held his hand in his bosom, and now he drew it out
so far as to show the brass gleam of a pistol butt.

'It is no use,' said he, in answer to some look in the other's eye.
'You stay in the hut, alive or dead.'

Lesage put his hands to his face and began to cry with loud, helpless
sobbings.

'Why, you have been worse than any of us, Charles,' he moaned.  'It was
you who told Toussac to kill the man from Bow Street, and it was you
also who set fire to the house in the Rue Basse de la Rampart.  And now
you turn on us!'

'I did that because I wished to be the one to throw light upon it all--and
at the proper moment.'

'That is very fine, Charles, but what will be thought about that when I
make it all public in my own defence?  How can you explain all that to
your Emperor?  There is still time to prevent my telling all that I know
about you.'

'Well, really, I think that you are right, my friend,' said the other,
drawing out his pistol and cocking it.  'Perhaps I _did_ go a little
beyond my instructions in one or two points, and, as you very properly
remark, there is still time to set it right.  It is a matter of detail
whether I give you up living or give you up dead, and I think that, on
the whole, it had better be dead.'

It had been horrible to see Toussac tear the throat out of the hound,
but it had not made my flesh creep as it crept now.  Pity was mingled
with my disgust for this unfortunate young man, who had been fitted by
Nature for the life of a retired student or of a dreaming poet, but who
had been dragged by stronger wills than his own into a part which no
child could be more incapable of playing.  I forgave him the trick by
which he had caught me and the selfish fears to which he had been
willing to sacrifice me.  He had flung himself down upon the ground, and
floundered about in a convulsion of terror, whilst his terrible little
companion, with his cynical smile, stood over him with his pistol in his
hand.  He played with the helpless panting coward as a cat might with a
mouse; but I read in his inexorable eyes that it was no jest, and his
finger seemed to be already tightening upon his trigger.  Full of horror
at so cold-blooded a murder, I pushed open my crazy cupboard, and had
rushed out to plead for the victim, when there came a buzz of voices and
a clanking of steel from without.  With a stentorian shout of 'In the
name of the Emperor!' a single violent wrench tore the door of the hut
from its hinges.

It was still blowing hard, and through the open doorway I could see a
thick cluster of mounted men, with plumes slanted and mantles flapping,
the rain shining upon their shoulders.  At the side the light from the
hut struck upon the heads of two beautiful horses, and upon the heavy
red-toupeed busbies of the hussars who stood at their heads.  In the
doorway stood another hussar--a man of high rank, as could be seen from
the richness of his dress and the distinction of his bearing.  He was
booted to the knees, with a uniform of light blue and silver, which his
tall, slim, light-cavalry figure suited to a marvel.  I could not but
admire the way in which he carried himself, for he never deigned to draw
the sword which shone at his side, but he stood in the doorway glancing
round the blood-bespattered hut, and staring at its occupants with a
very cool and alert expression.  He had a handsome face, pale and
clear-cut, with a bristling moustache, which cut across the brass
chin-chain of his busby.

'Well,' said he, 'well?'

The older man had put his pistol back into the breast of his brown coat.

'This is Lucien Lesage,' said he.

The hussar looked with disgust at the prostrate figure upon the floor.

'A pretty conspirator!' said he.  'Get up, you grovelling hound! Here,
Gerard, take charge of him and bring him into camp.'

A younger officer with two troopers at his heels came clanking in to the
hut, and the wretched creature, half swooning, was dragged out into the
darkness.

'Where is the other--the man called Toussac?'

'He killed the hound and escaped.  Lesage would have got away also had I
not prevented him.  If you had kept the dog in leash we should have had
them both, but as it is, Colonel Lasalle, I think that you may
congratulate me.'  He held out his hand as he spoke, but the other
turned abruptly on his heel.

'You hear that, General Savary?' said he, looking out of the door.
'Toussac has escaped.'

A tall, dark young man appeared within the circle of light cast by the
lamp.  The agitation of his handsome swarthy face showed the effect
which the news had upon him.

'Where is he then?'

'It is a quarter of an hour since he got away.'

'But he is the only dangerous man of them all.  The Emperor will be
furious.  In which direction did he fly?'

'It must have been inland.'

'But who is this?' asked General Savary, pointing at me.  'I understood
from your information that there were only two besides yourself,
Monsieur--.'

'I had rather no names were mentioned,' said the other abruptly.

'I can well understand that,' General Savary answered with a sneer.

'I would have told you that the cottage was the rendezvous, but it was
not decided upon until the last moment.  I gave you the means of
tracking Toussac, but you let the hound slip.  I certainly think that
you will have to answer to the Emperor for the way in which you have
managed the business.'

'That, sir, is our affair,' said General Savary sternly.  'In the
meantime you have not told us who this person is.'

It seemed useless for me to conceal my identity, since I had a letter in
my pocket which would reveal it.

'My name is Louis de Laval,' said I proudly.

I may confess that I think we had exaggerated our own importance over in
England.  We had thought that all France was wondering whether we should
return, whereas in the quick march of events France had really almost
forgotten our existence.  This young General Savary was not in the least
impressed by my aristocratic name, but he jotted it down in his
notebook.

'Monsieur de Laval has nothing whatever to do with the matter,' said the
spy.  'He has blundered into it entirely by chance, and I will answer
for his safe keeping in case he should be wanted.'

'He will certainly be wanted,' said General Savary.  'In the meantime I
need every trooper that I have for the chase, so, if you make yourself
personally responsible, and bring him to the camp when needed, I see no
objection to his remaining in your keeping.  I shall send to you if I
require him.'

'He will be at the Emperor's orders.'

'Are there any papers in the cottage?'

'They have been burned.'

'That is unfortunate.'

'But I have duplicates.'

'Excellent!  Come, Lasalle, every minute counts, and there is nothing to
be done here.  Let the men scatter, and we may still ride him down.'

The two tall soldiers clanked out of the cottage without taking any
further notice of my companion, and I heard the sharp stern order and
the jingling of metal as the troopers sprang back into their saddles
once more.  An instant later they were off, and I listened to the dull
beat of their hoofs dying rapidly into a confused murmur.  My little
snuff-coloured champion went to the door of the hut and peered after
them through the darkness.  Then he came back and looked me up and down,
with his usual dry sardonic smile.

'Well, young man,' said he, 'we have played some pretty _tableaux
vivants_ for your amusement, and you can thank me for that nice seat in
the front row of the parterre.'

'I am under a very deep obligation to you, sir,' I answered, struggling
between my gratitude and my aversion.  'I hardly know how to thank
you.'

He looked at me with a singular expression in his ironical eyes.

'You will have the opportunity for thanking me later,' said he.
'In the meantime, as you say that you are a stranger upon our coast, and
as I am responsible for your safe keeping, you cannot do better than
follow me, and I will take you to a place where you may sleep in
safety.'



CHAPTER VI


THE SECRET PASSAGE

The fire had already smouldered down, and my companion blew out the
lamp, so that we had not taken ten paces before we had lost sight of the
ill-omened cottage, in which I had received so singular a welcome upon
my home-coming.  The wind had softened down, but a fine rain, cold and
clammy, came drifting up from the sea.  Had I been left to myself I
should have found myself as much at a loss as I had been when I first
landed; but my companion walked with a brisk and assured step, so that
it was evident that he guided himself by landmarks which were invisible
to me.  For my part, wet and miserable, with my forlorn bundle under my
arm, and my nerves all jangled by my terrible experiences, I trudged in
silence by his side, turning over in my mind all that had occurred to
me.  Young as I was, I had heard much political discussion amongst my
elders in England, and the state of affairs in France was perfectly
familiar to me.  I was aware that the recent elevation of Buonaparte to
the throne had enraged the small but formidable section of Jacobins and
extreme Republicans, who saw that all their efforts to abolish a kingdom
had only ended in transforming it into an empire.  It was, indeed, a
pitiable result of their frenzied strivings that a crown with eight
_fleurs-de-lis_ should be changed into a higher crown surmounted by a
cross and ball.  On the other hand, the followers of the Bourbons, in
whose company I had spent my youth, were equally disappointed at the
manner in which the mass of the French people hailed this final step in
the return from chaos to order.  Contradictory as were their motives,
the more violent spirits of both parties were united in their hatred to
Napoleon, and in their fierce determination to get rid of him by any
means.  Hence a series of conspiracies, most of them with their base in
England; and hence also a large use of spies and informers upon the part
of Fouche and of Savary, upon whom the responsibility of the safety of
the Emperor lay.  A strange chance had landed me upon the French coast
at the very same time as a murderous conspirator, and had afterwards
enabled me to see the weapons with which the police contrived to thwart
and outwit him and his associates.  When I looked back upon my series of
adventures, my wanderings in the salt-marsh, my entrance into the
cottage, my discovery of the papers, my capture by the conspirators, the
long period of suspense with Toussac's dreadful thumb upon my chin, and
finally the moving scenes which I had witnessed--the killing of the
hound, the capture of Lesage, and the arrival of the soldiers--I could
not wonder that my nerves were overwrought, and that I surprised myself
in little convulsive gestures, like those of a frightened child.

The chief thought which now filled my mind was what my relations were
with this dangerous man who walked by my side.  His conduct and bearing
had filled me with abhorrence.  I had seen the depth of cunning with
which he had duped and betrayed his companions, and I had read in his
lean smiling face the cold deliberate cruelty of his nature, as he
stood, pistol in hand, over the whimpering coward whom he had outwitted.
Yet I could not deny that when, through my own foolish curiosity, I had
placed myself in a most hopeless position, it was he who had braved the
wrath of the formidable Toussac in order to extricate me.  It was
evident also that he might have made his achievement more striking by
delivering up two prisoners instead of one to the troopers.  It is true
that I was not a conspirator, but I might have found it difficult to
prove it.  So inconsistent did such conduct seem in this little yellow
flint-stone of a man that, after walking a mile or two in silence, I
asked him suddenly what the meaning of it might be.

I heard a dry chuckle in the darkness, as if he were amused by the
abruptness and directness of my question.

'You are a most amusing person, Monsieur--Monsieur--let me see, what did
you say your name was?'

'De Laval.'

'Ah, quite so, Monsieur de Laval.  You have the impetuosity and the
ingenuousness of youth.  You want to know what is up a chimney, you jump
up the chimney.  You want to know the reason of a thing, and you blurt
out a question.  I have been in the habit of living among people who
keep their thoughts to themselves, and I find you very refreshing.'

'Whatever the motives of your conduct, there is no doubt that you saved
my life,' said I.  'I am much obliged to you for your intercession.'
It is the most difficult thing in the world to express gratitude to a
person who fills you with abhorrence, and I fear that my halting speech
was another instance of that ingenuousness of which he accused me.

'I can do without your thanks,' said he coldly.  'You are perfectly
right when you think that if it had suited my purpose I should have let
you perish, and I am perfectly right when I think that if it were not
that you are under an obligation you would fail to see my hand if I
stretched it out to you just as that overgrown puppy Lasalle did.  It is
very honourable, he thinks, to serve the Emperor upon the field of
battle, and to risk life in his behalf, but when it comes to living
amidst danger as I have done, consorting with desperate men, and knowing
well that the least slip would mean death, why then one is beneath the
notice of a fine clean-handed gentleman.  Why,' he continued in a burst
of bitter passion, 'I have dared more, and endured more, with Toussac
and a few of his kidney for comrades, than this Lasalle has done in all
the childish cavalry charges that ever he undertook.  As to service, all
his Marshals put together have not rendered the Emperor as pressing a
service as I have done.  But I daresay it does not strike you in that
light, Monsieur--Monsieur--'

'De Laval.'

'Quite so--it is curious how that name escapes me.  I daresay you take
the same view as Colonel Lasalle?'

'It is not a question upon which I can offer an opinion,' said I.
'I only know that I owe my life to your intercession.'

I do not know what reply he might have made to this evasion, but at that
moment we heard a couple of pistol shots and a distant shouting from far
away in the darkness.  We stopped for a few minutes, but all was silent
once more.

'They must have caught sight of Toussac,' said my companion.  'I am
afraid that he is too strong and too cunning to be taken by them.  I do
not know what impression he left upon you, but I can tell you that you
will go far to meet a more dangerous man.'

I answered that I would go far to avoid meeting one, unless I had the
means of defending myself, and my companion's dry chuckle showed that he
appreciated my feelings.

'Yet he is an absolutely honest man, which is no very common thing in
these days,' said he.  'He is one of those who, at the outbreak of the
Revolution, embraced it with the whole strength of his simple nature.
He believed what the writers and the speakers told him, and he was
convinced that, after a little disturbance and a few necessary
executions, France was to become a heaven upon earth, the centre of
peace and comfort and brotherly love.  A good many people got those fine
ideas into their heads, but the heads have mostly dropped into the
sawdust-basket by this time.  Toussac was true to them, and when instead
of peace he found war, instead of comfort a grinding poverty, and
instead of equality an Empire, it drove him mad.  He became the fierce
creature you see, with the one idea of devoting his huge body and
giant's strength to the destruction of those who had interfered with his
ideal.  He is fearless, persevering, and implacable.  I have no doubt at
all that he will kill me for the part that I have played to-night.'

It was in the calmest voice that my companion uttered the remark, and it
made me understand that it was no boast when he said there was more
courage needed to carry on his unsavoury trade than to play the part of
a _beau sabreur_ like Lasalle.  He paused a little, and then went on as
if speaking to himself.

'Yes,' said he, 'I missed my chance.  I certainly  ought to have shot
him when he was struggling with the hound.  But if I had only wounded
him he would have torn me into bits like an over-boiled pullet, so
perhaps it is as well as it is.'

We had left the salt-marsh behind us, and for some time I had felt the
soft springy turf of the downland beneath my feet, and our path had
risen and dipped over the curves of the low coast hills.  In spite of
the darkness my companion walked with great assurance, never hesitating
for an instant, and keeping up a stiff pace which was welcome to me in
my sodden and benumbed condition.  I had been so young when I left my
native place that it is doubtful whether, even in daylight, I should
have recognised the countryside, but now in the darkness, half stupefied
by my adventures, I could not form the least idea as to where we were or
what we were making for.  A certain recklessness had taken possession of
me, and I cared little where I went as long as I could gain the rest and
shelter of which I stood in need.

I do not know how long we had walked; I only know that I had dozed and
woke and dozed again whilst still automatically keeping pace with my
comrade, when I was at last aroused by his coming to a dead stop.
The rain had ceased, and although the moon was still obscured, the
heavens had cleared somewhat, and I could see for a little distance in
every direction.  A huge white basin gaped in front of us, and I made
out that it was a deserted chalk quarry, with brambles and ferns growing
thickly all round the edges.  My companion, after a stealthy glance
round to make sure that no one was observing us, picked his way amongst
the scattered clumps of bushes until he reached the wall of chalk.  This
he skirted for some distance, squeezing between the cliff and the
brambles until he came at last to a spot where all further progress
appeared to be impossible.

'Can you see a light behind us?' asked my companion.

I turned round and looked carefully in every direction, but was unable
to see one.

'Never mind,' said he.  'You go first, and I will follow.'

In some way during the instant that my back had been turned he had swung
aside or plucked out the tangle of bush which had barred our way.  When
I turned there was a square dark opening in the white glimmering wall in
front of us.

'It is small at the entrance, but it grows larger further in,' said he.

I hesitated for an instant.  Whither was it that this strange man was
leading me?  Did he live in a cave like a wild beast, or was this some
trap into which he was luring me?  The moon shone out at the instant,
and in its silver light this black, silent porthole looked inexpressibly
cheerless and menacing.

'You have gone rather far to turn back, my good friend,' said my
companion.  'You must either trust me altogether or not trust me at
all.'

'I am at your disposal.'

'Pass in then, and I shall follow.'

I crept into the narrow passage, which was so low that I had to crawl
down it upon my hands and knees.  Craning my neck round, I could see the
black angular silhouette of my companion as he came after me.  He paused
at the entrance, and then, with a rustling of branches and snapping of
twigs, the faint light was suddenly shut off from outside, and we were
left in pitchy darkness.  I heard the scraping of his knees as he
crawled up behind me.

'Go on until you come to a step down,' said he.  'We shall have more
room there, and we can strike a light.'

The ceiling was so low that by arching my back I could easily strike it,
and my elbows touched the wall upon either side.  In those days I was
slim and lithe, however, so that I found no difficulty in making my way
onwards until, at the end of a hundred paces, or it may have been a
hundred and fifty, I felt with my hands that there was a dip in front of
me.  Down this I clambered, and was instantly conscious from the purer
air that I was in some larger cavity.  I heard the snapping of my
companion's flint, and the red glow of the tinder paper leaped suddenly
into the clear yellow flame of the taper.  At first I could only see
that stern, emaciated face, like some grotesque carving in walnut wood,
with the ceaseless fishlike vibration of the muscles of his jaw.  The
light beat full upon it, and it stood strangely out with a dim halo
round it in the darkness.  Then he raised the taper and swept it slowly
round at arm's length so as to illuminate the place in which we stood.

I found that we were in a subterranean tunnel, which appeared to extend
into the bowels of the earth.  It was so high that I could stand erect
with ease, and the old lichen-blotched stones which lined the walls told
of its great age.  At the spot where we stood the ceiling had fallen in
and the original passage been blocked, but a cutting had been made from
this point through the chalk to form the narrow burrow along which we
had come.  This cutting appeared to be quite recent, for a mound of
_debris_ and some trenching tools were still lying in the passage.
My companion, taper in hand, started off down the tunnel, and I followed
at his heels, stepping over the great stones which had fallen from the
roof or the walls, and now obstructed the path.

'Well,' said he, grinning at me over his shoulder, 'have you ever seen
anything like this in England?'

'Never,' I answered.

'These are the precautions and devices which men adopted in rough days
long ago.  Now that rough days have come again, they are very useful to
those who know of such places.'

'Whither does it lead, then?' I asked.

'To this,' said he, stopping before an old wooden door, powerfully
clamped with iron.  He fumbled with the metal-work, keeping himself
between me and it, so that I could not see what he was doing.  There was
a sharp snick, and the door revolved slowly upon its hinges.  Within
there was a steep flight of time-worn steps leading upwards.  He
motioned me on, and closed the door behind us.  At the head of the stair
there was a second wooden gate, which he opened in a similar manner.

I had been dazed before ever I came into the chalk pit, but now, at this
succession of incidents, I began to rub my eyes and ask myself whether
this was young Louis de Laval, late of Ashford, in Kent, or whether it
was some dream of the adventures of a hero of Pigault Lebrun.  These
massive moss-grown arches and mighty iron-clamped doors were, indeed,
like the dim shadowy background of a vision; but the guttering taper, my
sodden bundle, and all the sordid details of my disarranged toilet
assured me only too clearly of their reality.  Above all, the swift,
brisk, business-like manner of my companion, and his occasional abrupt
remarks, brought my fancies back to the ground once more.  He held the
door open for me now, and closed it again when I had passed through.

We found ourselves in a long vaulted corridor, with a stone-flagged
floor, and a dim oil lamp burning at the further end.  Two iron-barred
windows showed that we had come above the earth's surface once more.
Down this corridor we passed, and then through several passages and up a
short winding stair.  At the head of it was an open door, which led into
a small but comfortable bedroom.

'I presume that this will satisfy your wants for to-night,' said he.

I asked for nothing better than to throw myself down, damp clothes and
all, upon that snowy coverlet; but for the instant my curiosity overcame
my fatigue.

'I am much indebted to you, sir,' said I.  'Perhaps you will add to your
favours by letting me know where I am.'

'You are in my house, and that must suffice you for to-night.  In the
morning we shall go further into the matter.' He rang a small bell, and
a gaunt shock-headed country man-servant came running at the call.

'Your mistress has retired, I suppose?'

'Yes, sir, a good two hours ago.'

'Very good.  I shall call you myself in the morning.'  He closed my
door, and the echo of his steps seemed hardly to have died from my ears
before I had sunk into that deep and dreamless sleep which only youth
and fatigue can give.



CHAPTER VII


THE OWNER OF GROSBOIS

My host was as good as his word, for, when a noise in my room awoke me
in the morning, it was to find him standing by the side of my bed, so
composed in his features and so drab in his attire, that it was hard to
associate him with the stirring scenes of yesterday and with the
repulsive part which he had played in them.  Now in the fresh morning
sunlight he presented rather the appearance of a pedantic schoolmaster,
an impression which was increased by the masterful, and yet benevolent,
smile with which he regarded me.  In spite of his smile, I was more
conscious than ever that my whole soul shrank from him, and that I
should not be at my ease until I had broken this companionship which had
been so involuntarily formed.  He carried a heap of clothes over one
arm, which he threw upon a chair at the bottom of my bed.

'I gather from the little that you told me last night,' said he, 'that
your wardrobe is at present somewhat scanty.  I fear that your inches
are greater than those of anyone in my household, but I have brought a
few things here amongst which you may find something to fit you.
Here, too, are the razors, the soap, and the powder-box.  I will return
in half an hour, when your toilet will doubtless be completed.'

I found that my own clothes, with a little brushing, were as good as
ever, but I availed myself of his offer to the extent of a ruffled shirt
and a black satin cravat.  I had finished dressing and was looking out
of the window of my room, which opened on to a blank wall, when my host
returned.  He looked me all over with a keenly scrutinising eye, and
appeared to be satisfied with what he saw.

'That will do!  That will do very well indeed!' said he, nodding a
critical head.  'In these times a slight indication of travel or hard
work upon a costume is more fashionable than the foppishness of the
Incroyable.  I have heard ladies remark that it was in better taste.
Now, sir, if you will kindly follow me.'

His solicitude about my dress filled me with surprise, but this was soon
forgotten in the shock which was awaiting me.  For as we passed down the
passage and into a large hall which seemed strangely familiar to me,
there was a full-length portrait of my father standing right in front of
me.  I stood staring with a gasp of astonishment, and turned to see the
cold grey eyes of my companion fixed upon me with a humorous glitter.

'You seem surprised, Monsieur de Laval,' said he.

'For God's sake,' said I, 'do not trifle with me any further!  Who are
you, and what is this place  to which you have taken me?'

For answer he broke into one of his dry chuckles, and, laying his skinny
brown hand upon my wrist, he led me into a large apartment.  In the
centre was a table, tastefully laid, and beyond it in a low chair a
young lady was seated, with a book in her hand.  She rose as we entered,
and I saw that she was tall and slender, with a dark face, pronounced
features, and black eyes of extraordinary brilliancy.  Even in that one
glance it struck me that the expression with which she regarded me was
by no means a friendly one.

'Sibylle,' said my host, and his words took the breath from my lips,
'this is your cousin from England, Louis de Laval.  This, my dear
nephew, is my only daughter, Sibylle Bernac.'

'Then you--'

'I am your mother's brother, Charles Bernac.'

'You are my Uncle Bernac!' I stammered at him like an idiot.  'But why
did you not tell me so?' I cried.

'I was not sorry to have a chance of quietly observing what his English
education had done for my nephew.  It might also have been harder for me
to stand your friend if my comrades had any reason to think that I was
personally interested in you.  But you will permit me now to welcome you
heartily to France, and to express my regret if your reception has been
a rough one.  I am sure that Sibylle will help me to atone for it.'
He smiled archly at his daughter, who continued to regard me with a
stony face.

I looked round me, and gradually the spacious room, with the weapons
upon the wall, and the deer's heads, came dimly back to my memory.
That view through the oriel window, too, with the clump of oaks in the
sloping park, and the sea in the distance beyond, I had certainly seen
it before.  It was true then, and I was in our own castle of Grosbois,
and this dreadful man in the snuff-coloured coat, this sinister plotter
with the death's-head face, was the man whom I had heard my poor father
curse so often, the man who had ousted him from his own property and
installed himself in his place.  And yet I could not forget that it was
he also who, at some risk to himself, had saved me the night before, and
my soul was again torn between my gratitude and my repulsion.

We had seated ourselves at the table, and as we ate, this newly-found
uncle of mine continued to explain all those points which I had failed
to understand.

'I suspected that it was you the instant that I set eyes upon you,' said
he.  'I am old enough to remember your father when he was a young
gallant, and you are his very double--though I may say, without
flattery, that where there is a difference it is in your favour.
And yet he had the name of being one of the handsomest men betwixt Rouen
and the sea.  You must bear in mind that I was expecting you, and that
there are not so many young aristocrats of your age wandering about
along the coast.  I was surprised when you did not recognise where you
were last night.  Had you never heard of the secret passage of
Grosbois?'

It came vaguely back to me that in my childhood I had heard of this
underground tunnel, but that the roof had fallen in and rendered it
useless.

'Precisely,' said my uncle.  'When the castle passed into my hands, one
of the very first things which I did was to cut a new opening at the end
of it, for I foresaw that in these troublesome times it might be of use
to me; indeed, had it been in repair it might have made the escape of
your mother and father a very much easier affair.'

His words recalled all that I had heard and all that I could remember of
those dreadful days when we, the Lords of the country side, had been
chased across it as if we had been wolves, with the howling mob still
clustering at the pier-head to shake their fists and hurl their stones
at us.  I remembered, too, that it was this very man who was speaking to
me who had thrown oil upon the flames in those days, and whose fortunes
had been founded upon our ruin.  As I looked across at him I found that
his keen grey eyes were fixed upon me, and I could see that he had read
the thoughts in my mind.

'We must let bygones be bygones,' said he.  'Those are quarrels of the
last generation, and Sibylle and you represent a new one.'

My cousin had not said one word or taken any notice of my presence, but
at this joining of our names she glanced at me with the same hostile
expression which I had already remarked.

'Come, Sibylle,' said her father, 'you can assure your cousin Louis
that, so far as you are concerned, any family misunderstanding is at an
end.'

'It is very well for us to talk in that way, father,' she answered.
'It is not your picture that hangs in the hall, or your coat-of-arms
that I see upon the wall.  We hold the castle and the land, but it is
for the heir of the de Lavals to tell _us_ if he is satisfied with
this.'  Her dark scornful eyes were fixed upon me as she waited for my
reply, but her father hastened to intervene.

'This is not a very hospitable tone in which to greet your cousin,' said
he harshly.  'It has so chanced that Louis' heritage has fallen to us,
but it is not for us to remind him of the fact.'

'He needs no reminding,' said she.

'You do me an injustice,' I cried, for the evident and malignant scorn
of this girl galled me to the quick.  'It is true that I cannot forget
that this castle and these grounds belonged to my ancestors--I should be
a clod indeed if I _could_ forget it--but if you think that I harbour
any bitterness, you are mistaken.  For my own part, I ask nothing better
than to open up a career for myself with my own sword.'

'And never was there a time when it could be more easily and more
brilliantly done,' cried my uncle.  'There are great things about to
happen in the world, and if you are at the Emperor's court you will be
in the middle of them.  I understand that you are content to serve him?'

'I wish to serve my country.'

'By serving the Emperor you do so, for without him the country becomes
chaos.'

'From all we hear it is not a very easy service,' said my cousin.
'I should have thought that you would have been very much more
comfortable in England--and then you would have been so much safer
also.'

Everything which the girl said seemed to be meant as an insult to me,
and yet I could not imagine how I had ever offended her.  Never had I
met a woman for whom I conceived so hearty and rapid a dislike.  I could
see that her remarks were as offensive to her father as they were to me,
for he looked at her with eyes which were as angry as her own.

'Your cousin is a brave man, and that is more than can be said for
someone else that I could mention,' said he.

'For whom?' she asked.

'Never mind!' he snapped, and, jumping up with the air of a man who is
afraid that his rage may master him, and that he may say more than he
wished, he ran from the room.

She seemed startled by this retort of his, and rose as if she would
follow him.  Then she tossed her head and laughed incredulously.

'I suppose that you have never met your uncle before?' said she, after a
few minutes of embarrassed silence.

'Never,' answered I.

'Well, what do you think of him now you _have_ met him?'

Such a question from a daughter about her father filled me with a
certain vague horror.  I felt that he must be even a worse man than I
had taken him for if he had so completely forfeited the loyalty of his
own nearest and dearest.

'Your silence is a sufficient answer,' said she, as I hesitated for a
reply.  'I do not know how you came to meet him last night, or what
passed between you, for we do not share each other's confidences.
I think, however, that you have read him aright.  Now I have something
to ask you.  You had a letter from him inviting you to leave England and
to come here, had you not?'

'Yes, I had.'

'Did you observe nothing on the outside?'

I thought of those two sinister words which had puzzled me so much.

'What! it was you who warned me not to come?'

'Yes, it was I.  I had no other means of doing it.'

'But why did you do it?'

'Because I did not wish you to come here.'

'Did you think that I would harm you?'

She sat silent for a few seconds like one who is afraid of saying too
much.  When her answer came it was a very unexpected one:

'I was afraid that you would be harmed.'

'You think that I am in danger here?'

'I am sure of it.'

'You advise me to leave?'

'Without losing an instant.'

'From whom is the danger then?'

Again she hesitated, and then, with a reckless motion like one who
throws prudence to the winds, she turned upon me.

'It is from my father,' said she.

'But why should he harm me?'

'That is for your sagacity to discover.'

'But I assure you, mademoiselle, that in this matter you misjudge him,'
said I.  'As it happens, he interfered to save my life last night.'

'To save your life!  From whom?'

'From two conspirators whose plans I had chanced to discover.'

'Conspirators!'  She looked at me in surprise.

'They would have killed me if he had not intervened.'

'It is not his interest that you should be harmed yet awhile.  He had
reasons for wishing you to come to Castle Grosbois.  But I have been
very frank with you, and I wish you to be equally so with me.  Does it
happen--does it happen that during your youth in England you have ever--you
have ever had an affair of the heart?'

Everything which this cousin of mine said appeared to me to be stranger
than the last, and this question, coming at the end of so serious a
conversation, was the strangest of all.  But frankness begets frankness,
and I did not hesitate.

'I have left the very best and truest girl in the world behind me in
England,' said I.  'Eugenie is her name, Eugenie de Choiseul, the niece
of the old Duke.'

My reply seemed to give my cousin great satisfaction.  Her large dark
eyes shone with  pleasure.

'You are very attached?' she asked.

'I shall never be happy until I see her.'

'And you would not give her up?'

'God forbid!'

'Not for the Castle of Grosbois?'

'Not even for that.'

My cousin held out her hand to me with a charmingly frank impulsiveness.

'You will forgive me for my rudeness,' said she.  'I see that we are to
be allies and not enemies.'

And our hands were still clasped when her father re-entered the room.



CHAPTER VIII


COUSIN SIBYLLE

I could see in my uncle's grim face as he looked at us the keenest
satisfaction contending with surprise at this sign of our sudden
reconciliation.  All trace of his recent anger seemed to have left him
as he addressed his daughter, but in spite of his altered tone I noticed
that her eyes looked defiance and distrust.

'I have some papers of importance to look over,' said he.  'For an hour
or so I shall be engaged.  I can guess that Louis would like to see the
old place once again, and I am sure that he could not have a better
guide than you, Sibylle, if you will take him over it.'

She raised no objection, and for my part I was overjoyed at the
proposal, as it gave me an opportunity of learning more of this singular
cousin of mine, who had told me so much and yet seemed to know so much
more.  What was the meaning of this obscure warning which she had given
me against her father, and why was she so frankly anxious to know about
my love affairs?  These were the two questions which pressed for an
answer.  So out we went together into the sweet coast-land air, the
sweeter for the gale of the night before, and we walked through the old
yew-lined paths, and out into the park, and so round the castle, looking
up at the gables, the grey pinnacles, the oak-mullioned windows, the
ancient wing with its crenulated walls and its meurtriere windows, the
modern with its pleasant verandah and veil of honeysuckle.  And as she
showed me each fresh little detail, with a particularity which made me
understand how dear the place had become to her, she would still keep
offering her apologies for the fact that she should be the hostess and I
the visitor.

'It is not against you but against ourselves that I was bitter,' said
she, 'for are we not the cuckoos who have taken a strange nest and
driven out those who built it?  It makes me blush to think that my
father should invite you to your own house.'

'Perhaps we had been rooted here too long,' I answered.  'Perhaps it is
for our own good that we are driven out to carve our own fortunes, as I
intend to do.'

'You say that you are going to the Emperor?'

'Yes.'

'You know that he is in camp near here?'

'So I have heard.'

'But your family is still proscribed?'

'I have done him no harm.  I will go boldly to him and ask him to admit
me into his service.'

'Well,' said she, 'there are some who call him a usurper, and wish him
all evil; but for my own part I have never heard of anything that he has
said and done which was not great and noble.  But I had expected that
you would be quite an Englishman, Cousin Louis, and come over here with
your pockets full of Pitt's guineas and your heart of treason.'

'I have met nothing but hospitality from the English,' I answered; 'but
my heart has always been French.'

'But your father fought against us at Quiberon.'

'Let each generation settle its own quarrels,' said I.  'I am quite of
your father's opinion about that.'

'Do not judge my father by his words, but by his deeds,' said she, with
a warning finger upraised; 'and, above all, Cousin Louis, unless you
wish to have my life upon your conscience, never let him suspect that I
have said a word to set you on your guard.'

'Your life!' I gasped.

'Oh, yes, he would not stick at that!' she cried.  'He killed my mother.
I do not say that he slaughtered her, but I mean that his cold brutality
broke her gentle heart.  Now perhaps you begin to understand why I can
talk of him in this fashion.'

As she spoke I could see the secret broodings of years, the bitter
resentments crushed down in her silent soul, rising suddenly to flush
her dark cheeks and to gleam in her splendid eyes.  I realised at that
moment that in that tall slim figure there dwelt an unconquerable
spirit.

'You must think that I speak very freely to you, since I have only known
you a few hours, Cousin Louis,' said she.

'To whom should you speak freely if not to your own relative?'

'It is true; and yet I never expected that I should be on such terms
with you.  I looked forward to your coming with dread and sorrow.
No doubt I showed something of my feelings when my father brought you
in.'

'Indeed you did,' I answered.  'I feared that my presence was unwelcome
to you.'

'Most unwelcome, both for your own sake and for mine,' said she.
'For your sake because I suspected, as I have told you, that my father's
intentions might be unfriendly.  For mine--'

'Why for yours?' I asked in surprise, for she had stopped in
embarrassment.

'You have told me that your heart is another's.  I may tell you that my
hand is also promised, and that my love has gone with it.'

'May all happiness attend it!' said I.  'But why should this make my
coming unwelcome?'

'That thick English air has dimmed your wits, cousin,' said she, shaking
her stately head at me.  'But I can speak freely now that I know that
this plan would be as hateful to you as to me.  You must know, then,
that if my father could have married us he would have united all claims
to the succession of Grosbois.  Then, come what might--Bourbon or
Buonaparte--nothing could shake his position.'

I thought of the solicitude which he had shown over my toilet in the
morning, his anxiety that I should make a favourable impression, his
displeasure when she had been cold to me, and the smile upon his face
when he had seen us hand in hand.

'I believe you are right!' I cried.

'Right!  Of course I am right!  Look at him watching us now.'

We were walking on the edge of the dried moat, and as I looked up there,
sure enough, was the little yellow face toned towards us in the angle of
one of the windows.  Seeing that I was watching him, he rose and waved
his hand merrily.

'Now you know why he saved your life--since you say that he saved it,'
said she.  'It would suit his plans best that you should marry his
daughter, and so he wished you to live.  But when once he understands
that that is impossible, why then, my poor Cousin Louis, his only way of
guarding against the return of the de Lavals must lie in ensuring that
there are none to return.'

It was those words of hers, coupled with that furtive yellow face still
lurking at the window, which made me realise the imminence of my danger.
No one in France had any reason to take an interest in me.  If I were to
pass away there was no one who could make inquiry--I was absolutely in
his power.  My memory told me what a ruthless and dangerous man it was
with whom I had to deal.

'But,' said I, 'he must have known that your affections were already
engaged.'

'He did,' she answered; 'it was that which made me most uneasy of all.
I was afraid for you and afraid for myself, but, most of all, I was
afraid for Lucien.  No man can stand in the way of his plans.'

'Lucien!  'The name was like a lightning flash upon a dark night.  I had
heard of the vagaries of a woman's love, but was it possible that this
spirited woman loved that poor creature whom I had seen grovelling last
night in a frenzy of fear?  But now I remembered also where I had seen
the name Sibylle.  It was upon the fly-leaf of his book.  'Lucien, from
Sibylle,' was the inscription.  I recalled also that my uncle had said
something to him about his aspirations.

'Lucien is hot-headed, and easily carried away,' said she.  'My father
has seen a great deal of him lately.  They sit for hours in his room,
and Lucien will say nothing of what passes between them.  I fear that
there is something going forward which may lead to evil.  Lucien is a
student rather than a man of the world, but he has strong opinions about
politics.'

I was at my wit's ends what to do, whether to be silent, or to tell her
of the terrible position in which her lover was placed; but, even as I
hesitated, she, with the quick intuition of a woman, read the doubts
which were in my mind.

'You know something of him,' she cried.  'I understood that he had gone
to Paris.  For God's sake tell me what you know about him!'

'His name is Lesage?'

'Yes, yes.  Lucien Lesage.'

'I have--I have seen him,' I stammered.

'You have seen him!  And you only arrived in France last night.
Where did you see him? What has happened to him?'  She gripped me by the
wrist in her anxiety.

It was cruel to tell her, and yet it seemed more cruel still to keep
silent.  I looked round in my bewilderment, and there was my uncle
himself coming along over the close-cropped green lawn.  By his side,
with a merry clashing of steel and jingling of spurs, there walked a
handsome young hussar--the same to whom the charge of the prisoner had
been committed upon the night before.  Sibylle never hesitated for an
instant, but, with a set face and blazing eyes, she swept towards them.

'Father,' said she, 'what have you done with Lucien?'

I saw his impassive face wince for a moment before the passionate hatred
and contempt which he read in her eyes.  'We will discuss this at some
future time,' said he.

'I will know here and now,' she cried.  'What have you done with
Lucien?'

'Gentlemen,' said he, turning to the young hussar and me,' I am sorry
that we should intrude our little domestic differences upon your
attention.  You will, I am sure, make allowances, lieutenant, when I
tell you that your prisoner of last night was a very dear friend of my
daughter's.  Such family considerations do not prevent me from doing my
duty to the Emperor, but they make that duty more painful than it would
otherwise be.'

'You have my sympathy, mademoiselle,' said the young hussar.

It was to him that my cousin had now turned.

'Do I understand that you took him prisoner?' she asked.

'It was unfortunately my duty.'

'From you I will get the truth.  Whither did you take him?'

'To the Emperor's camp.'

'And why?'

'Ah, mademoiselle, it is not for me to go into politics.  My duties are
but to wield a sword, and sit a horse, and obey my orders.  Both these
gentlemen will be my witnesses that I received my instructions from
Colonel Lasalle.'

'But on what charge was he arrested?'

'Tut, tut, child, we have had enough of this!' said my uncle harshly.
'If you insist upon knowing I will tell you once and for all, that
Monsieur Lucien Lesage has been seized for being concerned in a plot
against the life of the Emperor, and that it was my privilege to
denounce the would-be assassin.'

'To denounce him!' cried the girl.  'I know that it was you who set him
on, who encouraged him, who held him to it whenever he tried to draw
back.  Oh, you villain! you villain!  What have I ever done, what sin of
my ancestors am I expiating, that I should be compelled to call such a
man Father?'

My uncle shrugged his shoulders as if to say that it was useless to
argue with a woman's tantrums.  The hussar and I made as if we would
stroll away, for it was embarrassing to stand listening to such words,
but in her fury she called to us to stop and be witnesses against him.
Never have I seen such a recklessness of passion as blazed in her dry
wide-opened eyes.

'You have deceived others, but you have never deceived me,' she cried.
'I know you as your own conscience knows you.  You may murder me, as you
murdered my mother before me, but you can never frighten me into being
your accomplice.  You proclaimed yourself a Republican that you might
creep into a house and estate which do not belong to you.  And now you
try to make a friend of Buonaparte by betraying your old associates, who
still trust in you.  And you have sent Lucien to his death!  But I know
your plans, and my Cousin Louis knows them also, and I can assure you
that there is just as much chance of his agreeing to them as there is of
my doing so.  I'd rather lie in my grave than be the wife of any man but
Lucien.'

'If you had seen the pitiful poltroon that he proved himself you would
not say so,' said my uncle coolly.  'You are not yourself at present,
but when you return to your right mind you will be ashamed of having
made this public exposure of your weakness.  And now, lieutenant, you
have something to say.'

'My message was to you, Monsieur de Laval,' said the young hussar,
turning his back contemptuously upon my uncle.  'The Emperor has sent me
to bring you to him at once at the camp at Boulogne.'

My heart leapt at the thought of escaping from my uncle.

'I ask nothing better,' I cried.

'A horse and an escort are waiting at the gates.'

'I am ready to start at this instant.'

'Nay, there can be no such very great hurry,' said my uncle.  'Surely
you will wait for luncheon, Lieutenant Gerard.'

'The Emperor's commissions, sir, are not carried out in such a manner,'
said the young hussar sternly.  'I have already wasted too much time.
We must be upon our way in five minutes.'

My uncle placed his hand upon my arm and led me slowly towards the
gateway, through which my cousin Sibylle had already passed.

'There is one matter that I wish to speak to you about before you go.
Since my time is so short you will forgive me if I introduce it without
preamble.  You have seen your cousin Sibylle, and though her behaviour
this morning is such as to prejudice you against her, yet I can assure
you that she is a very amiable girl.  She spoke just now as if she had
mentioned the plan which I had conceived to you.  I confess to you that
I cannot imagine anything more convenient than that we should unite in
order to settle once for all every question as to which branch of the
family shall hold the estates.'

'Unfortunately,' said I, 'there are objections.'

'And pray what are they?'

'The fact that my cousin's hand, as I have just learned, is promised to
another.'

'That need not hinder us,' said he, with a sour smile; 'I will undertake
that he never claims the promise.'

'I fear that I have the English idea of marriage, that it should go by
love and not by convenience.  But in any case your scheme is out of the
question, for my own affections are pledged to a young lady in England.'

He looked wickedly at me out of the corners of his grey eyes.

'Think well what you are doing, Louis,' said he, in a sibilant whisper
which was as menacing as a serpent's hiss.  'You are deranging my plans,
and that is not done with impunity.'

'It is not a matter in which I have any choice.'

He gripped me by the sleeve, and waved his hand round as Satan may have
done when he showed the kingdoms and principalities.  'Look at the
park,' he cried, 'the fields, the woods.  Look at the old castle in
which your fathers have lived for eight hundred years.  You have but to
say the word and it is all yours once more.'

There flashed up into my memory the little red-brick house at Ashford,
and Eugenie's sweet pale face looking over the laurel bushes which grew
by the window.

'It is impossible!' said I.

There must have been something in my manner which made him comprehend
that it really was so, for his face darkened with anger, and his
persuasion changed in an instant to menace.

'If I had known this they might have done what they wished with you last
night,' said he, 'I would never have put out a finger to save you.'

'I am glad to hear you say so,' I answered, 'for it makes it easier for
me to say that I wish to go my own way, and to have nothing more to do
with you.  What you have just said frees me from the bond of gratitude
which held me back.'

'I have no doubt that you would like to have nothing more to do with
me,' he cried.  'You will wish it more heartily still before you finish.
Very well, sir, go your own way and I will go mine, and we shall see who
comes out the best in the end.'

A group of hussars were standing by their horses' heads in the gateway.
In a few minutes I had packed my scanty possessions, and I was hastening
with them down the corridor when a chill struck suddenly through my
heart at the thought of my cousin Sibylle.  How could I leave her alone
with this grim companion in the old castle?  Had she not herself told me
that her very life might be at stake?  I had stopped in my perplexity,
and suddenly there was a patter of feet, and there she was running
towards me.

'Good-bye, Cousin Louis,' she cried, with outstretched hands.

'I was thinking of you,' said I; 'your father and I have had an
explanation and a quarrel.'

'Thank God!' she cried.  'Your only chance was to get away from him.
But beware, for he will do you an injury if he can!'

'He may do his worst; but how can I leave you here in his power?'

'Have no fears about me.  He has more reason to avoid me than I him.
But they are calling for you, Cousin Louis.  Good-bye, and God be with
you!'



CHAPTER IX


THE CAMP OF BOULOGNE

My uncle was still standing at the castle gateway, the very picture of a
usurper, with our own old coat-of-arms of the bend argent and the three
blue martlets engraved upon the stones at either side of him.  He gave
me no sign of greeting as I mounted the large grey horse which was
awaiting me, but he looked thoughtfully at me from under his down-drawn
brows, and his jaw muscles still throbbed with that stealthy rhythmical
movement.  I read a cold and settled malice in his set yellow face and
his stern eyes.  For my own part I sprang readily enough into the
saddle, for the man's presence had, from the first, been loathsome to
me, and I was right glad to be able to turn my back upon him.  And so,
with a stern quick order from the lieutenant and a jingle and clatter
from the troopers, we were off upon our journey.  As I glanced back at
the black keep of Grosbois, and at the sinister figure who stood looking
after us from beside the gateway, I saw from over his head a white
handkerchief gleam for an instant in a last greeting from one of the
gloomy meurtriere windows, and again a chill ran through me as I thought
of the fearless girl and of the hands in which we were leaving her.

But sorrow clears from the mind of youth like the tarnish of breath upon
glass, and who could carry a heavy heart upon so lightfooted a horse and
through so sweet an air?  The white glimmering road wound over the downs
with the sea far upon the left, and between lay that great salt-marsh
which had been the scene of our adventures.  I could even see, as I
fancied, a dull black spot in the distance to mark the position of that
terrible cottage.  Far away the little clusters of houses showed the
positions of Etaples, Ambleterre, and the other fishing villages, whilst
I could see that the point which had seemed last night to glow like a
half-forged red-hot sword-blade was now white as a snow-field with the
camp of a great army.  Far, far away, a little dim cloud upon the water
stood for the land where I had spent my days--the pleasant, homely land
which will always rank next to my own in my affections.

And now I turned my attention from the downs and the sea to the hussars
who rode beside me, forming, as I could perceive, a guard rather than an
escort.  Save for the patrol last night, they were the first of the
famous soldiers of Napoleon whom I had ever seen, and it was with
admiration and curiosity that I looked upon men who had won a world-wide
reputation for their discipline and their gallantry.  Their appearance
was by no means gorgeous, and their dress and equipment was much more
modest than that of the East Kent Yeomanry, which rode every Saturday
through Ashford; but the stained tunics, the worn leathers, and the
rough hardy horses gave them a very workmanlike appearance.  They were
small, light, brown-faced fellows, heavily whiskered and moustached,
many of them wearing ear-rings in their ears.  It surprised me that even
the youngest and most boyish-looking of them should be so bristling with
hair, until, upon a second look, I perceived that his whiskers were
formed of lumps of black wax stuck on to the sides of his face.   The
tall young lieutenant noticed the astonishment with which I gazed at his
boyish trooper.

'Yes, yes,' said he, 'they are artificial, sure enough; but what can you
expect from a lad of seventeen?  On the other hand, we cannot spoil the
appearance of the regiment upon parade by having a girl's cheeks in the
ranks.'

'It melts terribly in this warm weather, lieutenant,' said the hussar,
joining in the conversation with the freedom which was one of the
characteristics of Napoleon's troops.

'Well, well, Caspar, in a year or two you will dispense with them.'

'Who knows?  Perhaps he will have dispensed with his head also by that
time,' said a corporal in front, and they all laughed together in a
manner which in England would have meant a court-martial.  This seemed
to me to be one of the survivals of the Revolution, that officer and
private were left, upon a very familiar footing, which was increased, no
doubt, by the freedom with which the Emperor would chat with his old
soldiers, and the liberties which he would allow them to take with him.
It was no uncommon thing for a shower of chaff to come from the ranks
directed at their own commanding officers, and I am sorry to say, also,
that it was no very unusual thing for a shower of bullets to come also.
Unpopular officers were continually assassinated by their own men; at
the battle of Montebello it is well known that every officer, with the
exception of one lieutenant belonging to the 24th demi-brigade, was shot
down from behind.  But this was a relic of the bad times, and, as the
Emperor gained more complete control, a better feeling was established.
The history of our army at that time proved, at any rate, that the
highest efficiency could be maintained without the flogging which was
still used in the Prussian and the English service, and it was shown,
for the first time, that great bodies of men could be induced to act
from a sense of duty and a love of country, without hope of reward or
fear of punishment.  When a French general could suffer his division to
straggle as they would over the face of the country, with the certainty
that they would concentrate upon the day of battle, he proved that he
had soldiers who were worthy of his trust.

One thing had struck me as curious about these hussars--that they
pronounced French with the utmost difficulty.  I remarked it to the
lieutenant as he rode by my side, and I asked him from what foreign
country his men were recruited, since I could perceive that they were
not Frenchmen.

'My faith, you must not let them hear you say so,' said he, 'for they
would answer you as like as not by a thrust from their sabres.  We are
the premier regiment of the French cavalry, the First Hussars of
Bercheny, and, though it is true that our men are all recruited in
Alsace, and few of them can speak anything but German, they are as good
Frenchmen as Kleber or Kellermann, who came from the same parts.
Our men are all picked, and our officers,' he added, pulling at his
light moustache, 'are the finest in the service.'

The swaggering vanity of the fellow amused me, for he cocked his busby,
swung the blue dolman which hung from his shoulder, sat his horse, and
clattered his scabbard in a manner which told of his boyish delight and
pride in himself and his regiment.  As I looked at his lithe figure and
his fearless bearing, I could quite imagine that he did himself no more
than justice, while his frank smile and his merry blue eyes assured me
that he would prove a good comrade.  He had himself been taking
observations of me, for he suddenly placed his hand upon my knee as we
rode side by side.

'I trust that the Emperor is not displeased with you,' said he, with a
very grave face.

'I cannot think that he can be so,' I answered, 'for I have come from
England to put my services at his disposal.'

'When the report was presented last night, and he heard of your presence
in that den of thieves, he was very anxious that you should be brought
to him.  Perhaps it is that he wishes you to be guide to us in England.
No doubt you know your way all over the island.'

The hussar's idea of an island seemed to be limited to the little
patches which lie off the Norman or Breton coast.  I tried to explain to
him that this was a great country, not much smaller than France.

'Well, well,' said he, 'we shall know all about it presently, for we are
going to conquer it.  They say in the camp that we shall probably enter
London either next Wednesday evening or else on the Thursday morning.
We are to have a week for plundering the town, and then one army corps
is to take possession of Scotland and another of Ireland.'

His serene confidence made me smile.  'But how do you know you can do
all this?' I asked.

'Oh!' said he, 'the Emperor has arranged it.'

'But they have an army, and they are well prepared.  They are brave men
and they will fight.'

'There would be no use their doing that, for the Emperor is going over
himself,' said he; and in the simple answer I understood for the first
time the absolute trust and confidence which these soldiers had in their
leader.  Their feeling for him was fanaticism, and its strength was
religion, and never did Mahomet nerve the arms of his believers and
strengthen them against pain and death more absolutely than this little
grey-coated idol did to those who worshipped him.  If he had chosen--and
he was more than once upon the point of it--to assert that he was
indeed above humanity he would have found millions to grant his claim.
You who have heard of him as a stout gentleman in a straw hat, as he was
in his later days, may find it hard to understand it, but if you had
seen his mangled soldiers still with their dying breath crying out to
him, and turning their livid faces towards him as he passed, you would
have realised the hold which he had over the minds of men.

'You have been over there?' asked the lieutenant presently, jerking his
thumb towards the distant cloud upon the water.

'Yes, I have spent my life there.'

'But why did you stay there when there was such good fighting to be had
in the French service?'

'My father was driven out of the country as an aristocrat.  It was only
after his death that I could offer my sword to the Emperor.'

'You have missed a great deal, but I have no doubt that we shall still
have plenty of fine wars.  And you think that the English will offer us
battle?'

'I have no doubt of it.'

'We feared that when they understood that it was the Emperor in person
who had come they would throw down their arms.  I have heard that
there are some fine women over there.'

'The women are beautiful.'

He said nothing, but for some time he squared his shoulders and puffed
out his chest, curling up the ends of his little yellow moustache.

'But they will escape in boats,' he muttered at last; and I could see
that he had still that picture of a little island in his imagination.
'If they could but see us they might remain.  It has been said of the
Hussars of Bercheny that they can set a whole population running, the
women towards us, the men away.  We are, as you have no doubt observed,
a very fine body of men, and the officers are the pick of the service,
though the seniors are hardly up to the same standard as the rest of
us.'

With all his self-confidence, this officer did not seem to me to be more
than my own age, so I asked him whether he had seen any service.  His
moustache bristled with indignation at my question, and he looked me up
and down with a severe eye.

'I have had the good fortune to be present at nine battles, sir, and at
more than forty skirmishes,' said he.  'I have also fought a
considerable number of duels, and I can assure you that I am always
ready to meet anyone--even a civilian--who may wish to put me to the
proof.'

I assured him that he was very fortunate to be so young and yet to have
seen so much, upon which his ill-temper vanished as quickly as it came,
and he explained that he had served in the Hohenlinden campaign under
Moreau, as well as in Napoleon's passage of the Alps, and the campaign
of Marengo.

'When you have been with the army for a little time the name of Etienne
Gerard will not be so unfamiliar to you,' said he.  'I believe that I
may claim to be the hero of one or two little stories which the soldiers
love to tell about their camp fires.  You will hear of my duel with the
six fencing masters, and you will be told how, single-handed, I charged
the Austrian Hussars of Graz and brought their silver kettledrum back
upon the crupper of my mare.  I can assure you that it was not by
accident that I was present last night, but it was because Colonel
Lasalle was very anxious to be sure of any prisoners whom he might make.
As it turned out, however, I only had the one poor chicken-hearted
creature, whom I handed over to the provost-marshal.'

'And the other--Toussac?'

'Ah, he seems to have been a man of another breed.  I could have asked
nothing better than to have had him at my sword-point.  But he has
escaped.  They caught sight of him and fired a pistol or two, but he
knew the bog too well, and they could not follow him.'

'And what will be done to your prisoner?' I asked.

Lieutenant Gerard shrugged his shoulders.

'I am very sorry for Mademoiselle your cousin,' said he, 'but a fine
girl should not love such a man when there are so many gallant soldiers
upon the country side.  I hear that the Emperor is weary of these
endless plottings, and that an example will be made of him.'

Whilst the young hussar and I had been talking we had been cantering
down the broad white road, until we were now quite close to the camp,
which we could see lying in its arrangement of regiments and brigades
beneath us.  Our approach lay over the high ground, so that we could see
down into this canvas city, with its interminable lines of picketed
horses, its parks of artillery, and its swarms of soldiers.  In the
centre was a clear space, with one very large tent and a cluster of low
wooden houses in the middle of it, with the tricolour banner waving
above them.

'That is the Emperor's quarters, and the smaller tent there is the
headquarters of General Ney, who commands this corps.  You understand
that this is only one of several armies dotted along from Dunkirk in the
north to this, which is the most southerly.  The Emperor goes from one
to the other, inspecting each in its turn, but this is the main body,
and contains most of the picked troops, so that it is we who see most of
him, especially now that the Empress and the Court have come to Pont de
Briques.  He is in there at the present moment,' he added in a hushed
voice, pointing to the great white tent in the centre.

The road into the camp ran through a considerable plain, which was
covered by bodies of cavalry and infantry engaged upon their drill.
We had heard so much in England about Napoleon's troops, and their feats
had appeared so extraordinary, that my imagination had prepared me for
men of very striking appearance.  As a matter of fact, the ordinary
infantry of the line, in their blue coats and white breeches and
gaiters, were quite little fellows, and even their high brass-covered
hats and red plumes could not make them very imposing.

In spite of their size, however, they were tough and wiry, and after
their eighteen months in camp they were trained to the highest pitch of
perfection.  The ranks were full of veterans, and all the under-officers
had seen much service, while the generals in command have never been
equalled in ability, so that it was no mean foe which lay with its
menacing eyes fixed upon the distant cliffs of England.  If Pitt had not
been able to place the first navy in the world between the two shores
the history of Europe might be very different to-day.

Lieutenant Gerard, seeing the interest with which I gazed at the
manoeuvring troops, was good enough to satisfy my curiosity about such
of them as approached the road along which we were journeying.

'Those fellows on the black horses with the great blue rugs upon their
croups are the Cuirassiers,' said he.  'They are so heavy that they
cannot raise more than a trot, so when they charge we manage that there
shall be a brigade of chasseurs or hussars behind them to follow up the
advantage.'

'Who is the civilian who is inspecting them?' I asked.

'That is not a civilian, but it is General St. Cyr, who is one of those
whom they called the Spartans of the Rhine.  They were of opinion that
simplicity of life and of dress were part of a good soldier, and so they
would wear no uniform beyond a simple blue riding coat, such as you see.
St. Cyr is an excellent officer, but he is not popular, for he seldom
speaks to anyone, and he sometimes shuts himself up for days on end in
his tent, where he plays upon his violin.  I think myself that a soldier
is none the worse because he enjoys a glass of good wine, or has a smart
jacket and a few Brandenburgs across his chest.  For my part I do both,
and yet those who know me would tell you that it has not harmed my
soldiering.  You see this infantry upon the left?'

'The men with the yellow facings?'

'Precisely.  Those are Oudinot's famous grenadiers.  And the other
grenadiers, with the red shoulder-knots and the fur hats strapped above
their knapsacks, are the Imperial Guard, the successors of the old
Consular Guard who won Marengo for us.  Eighteen hundred of them got the
cross of honour after the battle.  There is the 57th of the line, which
has been named "The Terrible," and there is the 7th Light Infantry, who
come from the Pyrenees, and who are well known to be the best marchers
and the greatest rascals in the army.  The light cavalry in green are
the Horse Chasseurs of the Guard, sometimes called the Guides, who are
said to be the Emperor's favourite troops, although he makes a great
mistake if he prefers them to the Hussars of Bercheny.  The other
cavalry with the green pelisses are also chasseurs, but I cannot tell
from here what regiment they are.  Their colonel handles them admirably.
They are moving to a flank in open column of half-squadrons and then
wheeling into line to charge.  We could not do it better ourselves.  And
now, Monsieur de Laval, here we are at the gates of the Camp of
Boulogne, and it is my duty to take you straight to the Emperor's
quarters.'



CHAPTER X


THE ANTE-ROOM

The camp of Boulogne contained at that time one hundred and fifty
thousand infantry, with fifty thousand cavalry, so that its population
was second only to Paris among the cities of France.  It was divided
into four sections, the right camp, the left camp, the camp of Wimereux,
and the camp of Ambleteuse, the whole being about a mile in depth, and
extending along the seashore for a length of about seven miles.  On the
land side it was open, but on the sea side it was fringed by powerful
batteries containing mortars and cannon of a size never seen before.
These batteries were placed along the edges of the high cliffs, and
their lofty position increased their range, and enabled them to drop
their missiles upon the decks of the English ships.

It was a pretty sight to ride through the camp, for the men had been
there for more than a year, and had done all that was possible to
decorate and ornament their tents.  Most of them had little gardens in
front or around them, and the sun-burned fellows might be seen as we
passed kneeling in their shirt-sleeves with their spuds and their
watering-cans in the midst of their flower-beds.  Others sat in the
sunshine at the openings of the tents tying up their queues,
pipe-claying their belts, and polishing their arms, hardly bestowing a
glance upon us as we passed, for patrols of cavalry were coming and
going in every direction.  The endless lines were formed into streets,
with their names printed up upon boards.  Thus we had passed through the
Rue d'Arcola, the Rue de Kleber, the Rue d'Egypte, and the Rue
d'Artillerie Volante, before we found ourselves in the great central
square in which the headquarters of the army were situated.

The Emperor at this time used to sleep at a village called Pont de
Briques, some four miles inland, but his days were spent at the camp,
and his continual councils of war were held there.  Here also were his
ministers, and the generals of the army corps which were scattered up
and down the coast came thither to make their reports and to receive
their orders.  For these consultations a plain wooden house had been
constructed containing one very large room and three small ones.  The
pavilion which we had observed from the Downs served as an ante-chamber
to the house, in which those who sought audience with the Emperor might
assemble.  It was at the door of this, where a strong guard of
grenadiers announced Napoleon's presence, that my guardian sprang down
from his horse and signed to me to follow his example.  An officer of
the guard took our names and returned to us accompanied by General
Duroc, a thin, hard, dry man of forty, with a formal manner and a
suspicious eye.

'Is this Monsieur Louis de Laval?' he asked, with a stiff smile.

I bowed.

'The Emperor is very anxious to see you.  You are no longer needed,
Lieutenant.'

'I am personally responsible for bringing him safely, General.'

'Very good.  You may come in, if you prefer it!'  And he passed us into
the huge tent, which was unfurnished, save for a row of wooden benches
round the sides.  A number of men in naval and military uniforms were
seated upon these, and numerous groups were standing about chatting in
subdued tones.  At the far end was a door which led into the Imperial
council chamber.  Now and then I saw some man in official dress walk up
to this door, scratch gently upon it with his nail, and then, as it
instantly opened, slip discreetly through, closing it softly behind him.
Over the whole assembly there hung an air of the Court rather than of
the camp, an atmosphere of awe and of reverence which was the more
impressive when it affected these bluff soldiers and sailors.
The Emperor had seemed to me to be formidable in the distance, but I
found him even more overwhelming now that he was close at hand.

'You need have no fears, Monsieur de Laval,' said my companion.
'You are going to have a good reception.'

'How do you know that?'

'From General Duroc's manner.  In these cursed Courts, if the Emperor
smiles upon you everyone smiles, down to that flunkey in the red velvet
coat yonder.  But if the Emperor frowns, why, you have only to look at
the face of the man who washes the Imperial plates, and you will see the
frown reflected upon it.  And the worst of it is that, if you are a
plain-witted man, you may never find out what earned you either the
frown or the smile.  That is why I had rather wear the shoulder-straps
of a lieutenant, and be at the side of my squadron, with a good horse
between my knees and my sabre clanking against my stirrup-iron, than
have Monsieur Talleyrand's grand hotel in the Rue Saint Florentin, and
his hundred thousand livres of income.'

I was still wondering whether the hussar could be right, and if the
smile with which Duroc had greeted me could mean that the Emperor's
intentions towards me were friendly, when a very tall and handsome young
man, in a brilliant uniform, came towards me.  In spite of the change in
his dress, I recognised him at once as the General Savary who had
commanded the expedition of the night before.

'Well, Monsieur de Laval,' said he, shaking hands with me very
pleasantly, 'you have heard, no doubt, that this fellow Toussac has
escaped us.  He was really the only one whom we were anxious to seize,
for the other is evidently a mere dupe and dreamer.  But we shall have
him yet, and between ourselves we shall keep a very strict guard upon
the Emperor's person until we do, for Master Toussac is not a man to be
despised.'

I seemed to feel his great rough thumb upon my chin as I answered that I
thought he was a very dangerous man indeed.

'The Emperor will see you presently,' said Savary.  'He is very busy
this morning, but he bade me say that you should have an audience.'
He smiled and passed on.

'Assuredly you are getting on,' whispered Gerard.  'There are a good
many men here who would risk something to have Savary address them as he
addressed you.  The Emperor is certainly going to do something for you.
But attention, friend, for here is Monsieur de Talleyrand himself coming
towards us.'

A singular-looking person was shuffling in our direction.  He was a man
about fifty years of age, largely made about the shoulders and chest,
but stooping a good deal, and limping heavily in one leg.  He walked
slowly, leaning upon a silver-headed stick, and his sober suit of black,
with silk stockings of the same hue, looked strangely staid among the
brilliant uniforms which surrounded him.  But in spite of his plain
dress there was an expression of great authority upon his shrewd face,
and every one drew back with bows and salutes as he moved across the tent.

'Monsieur Louis de Laval?' said he, as he stopped in front of me, and
his cold grey eyes played over me from head to heel.

I bowed, and with some coldness, for I shared the dislike which my
father used to profess for this unfrocked priest and perjured
politician; but his manner was so polished and engaging that it was hard
to hold out against it.

'I knew your cousin de Rohan very well indeed,' said he.  'We were two
rascals together when the world was not quite so serious as it is at
present.  I believe that you are related to the Cardinal de Montmorency
de Laval, who is also an old friend of mine.  I understand that you are
about to offer your services to the Emperor?'

'I have come from England for that purpose, sir.'

'And met with some little adventure immediately upon your arrival, as I
understand.  I have heard the story of the worthy police agent, the two
Jacobins, and the lonely hut.  Well, you have seen the danger to which
the Emperor is exposed, and it may make you the more zealous in his
service.  Where is your uncle, Monsieur Bernac?'

'He is at the Castle of Grosbois.'

'Do you know him well?'

'I had not seen him until yesterday.'

'He is a very useful servant of the Emperor, but--but--' he inclined his
head downward to my ear, 'some more congenial service will be found for
you, Monsieur de Laval,' and so, with a bow, he whisked round, and
tapped his way across the tent again.

'Why, my friend, you are certainly destined for something great,' said
the hussar lieutenant.  'Monsieur de Talleyrand does not waste his
smiles and his bows, I promise you.  He knows which way the wind blows
before he flies his kite, and I foresee that I shall be asking for your
interest to get me my captaincy in this English campaign.  Ah, the
council of war is at an end.'

As he spoke the inner door at the end of the great tent opened, and a
small knot of men came through dressed in the dark blue coats, with
trimmings of gold oak-leaves, which marked the marshals of the Empire.
They were, all but one, men who had hardly reached their middle age, and
who, in any other army, might have been considered fortunate if they had
gained the command of a regiment; but the continuous wars and the open
system by which rules of seniority yielded to merit had opened up a
rapid career to a successful soldier.  Each carried his curved cocked
hat under his arm, and now, leaning upon their sword-hilts, they fell
into a little circle and chatted eagerly among themselves.

'You are a man of family, are you not?' asked my hussar.

'I am of the same blood as the de Rohans and the Montmorencies.'

'So I had understood.  Well, then, you will understand that there have
been some changes in this country when I tell you that those men, who,
under the Emperor, are the greatest in the country have been the one a
waiter, the next a wine smuggler, the next a cooper of barrels, and the
next a house painter.  Those are the trades which gave us Murat,
Massena, Ney, and Lannes.'

Aristocrat as I was, no names had ever thrilled me as those did, and I
eagerly asked him to point me out each of these famous soldiers.

'Oh, there are many famous soldiers in the room,' said he.  'Besides,'
he added, twisting his moustache, 'there may be junior officers here who
have it in them to rise higher than any of them.  But there is Ney to
the right.'

I saw a man with close-cropped red hair and a large square-jowled face,
such as I have seen upon an English prize-fighter.

'We call him Peter the Red, and sometimes the Red Lion, in the army,'
said my companion.  'He is said to be the bravest man in the army,
though I cannot admit that he is braver than some other people whom I
could mention.  Still he is undoubtedly a very good leader.'

'And the general next him?' I asked.  'Why does he carry his head all
upon one side?'

'That is General Lannes, and he carries his head upon his left shoulder
because he was shot through the neck at the siege of St. Jean d'Acre.
He is a Gascon, like myself, and I fear that he gives some ground to
those who accuse my countrymen of being a little talkative and
quarrelsome.  But monsieur smiles?'

'You are mistaken.'

'I thought that perhaps something which I had said might have amused
monsieur.  I thought that possibly he meant that Gascons really were
quarrelsome, instead of being, as I contend, the mildest race in
France--an opinion which I am always ready to uphold in any way which
may be suggested.  But, as I say, Lannes is a very valiant man, though,
occasionally, perhaps, a trifle hot-headed.  The next man is Auguereau.'

I looked with interest upon the hero of Castiglione, who had taken
command upon the one occasion when Napoleon's heart and spirit had
failed him.  He was a man, I should judge, who would shine rather in war
than in peace, for, with his long goat's face and his brandy nose, he
looked, in spite of his golden oak-leaves, just such a long-legged,
vulgar, swaggering, foul-mouthed old soldier as every barrack-room can
show.  He was an older man than the others, and his sudden promotion had
come too late for him to change.  He was always the Corporal of the
Prussian Guard under the hat of the French Marshal.

'Yes, yes; he is a rough fellow,' said Gerard, in answer to my remark.
'He is one of those whom the Emperor had to warn that he wished them to
be soldiers only with the army.  He and Rapp and Lefebvre, with their
big boots and their clanking sabres, were too much for the Empress's
drawing-room at the Tuileries.  There is Vandamme also, the dark man
with the heavy face.  Heaven help the English village that he finds his
quarters in!  It was he who got into trouble because he broke the jaw of
a Westphalian priest who could not find him a second bottle of Tokay.'

'And that is Murat, I suppose?'

'Yes; that is Murat with the black whiskers and the red, thick lips, and
the brown of Egypt upon his face.  He is the man for me!  My word, when
you have seen him raving in front of a brigade of light cavalry, with
his plumes tossing and his sabre flashing, you would not wish to see
anything finer.  I have known a square of grenadiers break and scatter
at the very sight of him.  In Egypt the Emperor kept away from him, for
the Arabs would not look at the little General when this fine horseman
and swordsman was before them.  In my opinion Lasalle is the better
light cavalry officer, but there is no one whom the men will follow as
they do Murat.'

'And who is the stern-looking man, leaning on the Oriental sword?'

'Oh, that is Soult!  He is the most obstinate man in the world.  He
argues with the Emperor.  The handsome man beside him is Junot, and
Bernadotte is leaning against the tent-pole.'

I looked with interest at the extraordinary face of this adventurer,
who, after starting with a musket and a knapsack in the ranks, was not
contented with the baton of a marshal, but passed on afterwards to grasp
the sceptre of a king.  And it might be said of him that, unlike his
fellows, he gained his throne in spite of Napoleon rather than by his
aid.  Any man who looked at his singular pronounced features, the
swarthiness of which proclaimed his half Spanish origin, must have read
in his flashing black eyes and in that huge aggressive nose that he was
reserved for a strange destiny.  Of all the fierce and masterful men who
surrounded the Emperor there was none with greater gifts, and none,
also, whose ambitions he more distrusted, than those of Jules
Bernadotte.

And yet, fierce and masterful as these men were, having, as Auguereau
boasted, fear neither of God nor of the devil, there was something which
thrilled or cowed them in the pale smile or black frown of the little
man who ruled them.  For, as I watched them, there suddenly came over
the assembly a start and hush such as you see in a boys' school when the
master enters unexpectedly, and there near the open doors of his
headquarters stood the master himself.  Even without that sudden
silence, and the scramble to their feet of those upon the benches, I
felt that I should have known instantly that he was present.  There was
a pale luminosity about his ivory face which drew the eye towards it,
and though his dress might be the plainest of a hundred, his appearance
would be the first which one would notice.  There he was, with his
little plump, heavy-shouldered figure, his green coat with the red
collar and cuffs, his white, well-formed legs, his sword with the gilt
hilt and the tortoise-shell scabbard.  His head was uncovered, showing
his thin hair of a ruddy chestnut colour.  Under one arm was the flat
cocked hat with the twopenny tricolour rosette, which was already
reproduced in his pictures.  In his right hand he held a little riding
switch with a metal head.  He walked slowly forward, his face immutable,
his eyes fixed steadily before him, measured, inexorable, the very
personification of Destiny.

'Admiral Bruix!'

I do not know if that voice thrilled through every one as it did through
me.  Never had I heard anything more harsh, more menacing, more
sinister.  From under his puckered brows his light-blue eyes glanced
swiftly round with a sweep like a sabre.

'I am here, Sire!'  A dark, grizzled, middle-aged man, in a naval
uniform, had advanced from the throng.  Napoleon took three quick little
steps towards him in so menacing a fashion, that I saw the
weather-stained cheeks of the sailor turn a shade paler, and he gave a
helpless glance round him, as if for assistance.

'How comes it, Admiral Bruix,' cried the Emperor, in the same terrible
rasping voice, 'that you did not obey my commands last night?'

'I could see that a westerly gale was coming up, Sire.  I knew that--,'
he could hardly speak for his agitation, 'I knew that if the ships went
out with this lee shore--'

'What right have you to judge, sir?' cried the Emperor, in a cold fury
of indignation.  'Do you conceive that your judgment is to be placed
against mine?'

'In matters of navigation, Sire.'

'In no matters whatsoever.'

'But the tempest, Sire!  Did it not prove me to be in the right?'

'What!  You still dare to bandy words with me?'

'When I have justice on my side.'

There was a hush amidst all the great audience;  such a heavy silence as
comes only when many are waiting, and all with bated breath.
The Emperor's face was terrible.  His cheeks were of a greenish, livid
tint, and there was a singular rotary movement of the muscles of his
forehead.  It was the countenance of an epileptic.  He raised the whip
to his shoulder, and took a step towards the admiral.

'You insolent rascal!' he hissed.  It was the Italian word _coglione_
which he used, and I observed that as his feelings overcame him his
French became more and more that of a foreigner.

For a moment he seemed to be about to slash the sailor across the face
with his whip.  The latter took a step back, and clapped his hand to his
sword.

'Have a care, Sire,' said he.

For a few instants the tension was terrible.  Then Napoleon brought the
whip down with a sharp crack against his own thigh.

'Vice-Admiral Magon,' he cried, 'you will in future receive all orders
connected with the fleet.  Admiral Bruix, you will leave Boulogne in
twenty-four hours and withdraw to Holland.   Where is Lieutenant Gerard,
of the Hussars of Bercheny?'

My companion's gauntlet sprang to his busby.

'I ordered you to bring Monsieur Louis de Laval from the castle of
Grosbois.'

'He is here, Sire.'

'Good! You may retire.'

The lieutenant saluted, whisked round upon his heel, and clattered away,
whilst the Emperor's blue eyes were turned upon me.  I had often heard
the phrase of eyes looking through you, but that piercing gaze did
really give one the feeling that it penetrated to one's inmost thoughts.
But the sternness had all melted out of it, and I read a great
gentleness and kindness in their expression.

'You have come to serve me, Monsieur de Laval?'

'Yes, Sire.'

'You have been some time in making up your mind.'

'I was not my own master, Sire.'

'Your father was an aristocrat?'

'Yes, Sire.'

'And a supporter of the Bourbons?'

'Yes, Sire.'

'You will find that in France now there are no aristocrats and no
Jacobins; but that we are all Frenchmen working for the glory of our
country.  Have you seen Louis de Bourbon?'

'I have seen him once, Sire.'

'An insignificant-looking man, is he not?'

'No, Sire, I thought him a fine-looking man.'

For a moment I saw a hard gleam of resentment in those changing blue
eyes.  Then he put out his hand and pinched one of my ears.

'Monsieur de Laval was not born to be a courtier,' said he.
'Well, well, Louis de Bourbon will find that he cannot gain a throne by
writing proclamations in London and signing them Louis.  For my part, I
found the crown of France lying upon the ground, and I lifted it upon my
sword-point.'

'You have lifted France with your sword also, Sire,' said Talleyrand,
who stood at his elbow.

Napoleon looked at his famous minister, and I seemed to read suspicion
in his eyes.  Then he turned to his secretary.

'I leave Monsieur de Laval in your hands, de Meneval,' said he.
'I desire to see him in the council chamber after the inspection of the
artillery.'



CHAPTER XI


THE SECRETARY

Emperor, generals, and officials all streamed away to the review,
leaving me with a gentle-looking, large-eyed man in a black suit with
very white cambric ruffles, who introduced himself to me as Monsieur de
Meneval, private secretary to His Majesty.

'We must get some food, Monsieur de Laval,' said he.  'It is always
well, if you have anything to do with the Emperor, to get your food
whenever you have the chance.  It may be many hours before he takes a
meal, and if you are in his presence you have to fast also.  I assure
you that I have nearly fainted from hunger and from thirst.'

'But how does the Emperor manage himself?' I asked.  This Monsieur de
Meneval had such a kindly human appearance that I already felt much at
my ease with him.

'Oh, he, he is a man of iron, Monsieur de Laval.  We must not set our
watches by his.  I have known him work for eighteen hours on end and
take nothing but a cup or two of coffee.  He wears everybody out around
him.  Even the soldiers cannot keep up with him.  I assure you that I
look upon it as the very highest honour to have charge of his papers,
but there are times when it is very trying all the same.  Sometimes it
is eleven o'clock at night, Monsieur de Laval, and I am writing to his
dictation with my head aching for want of sleep.  It is dreadful work,
for he dictates as quickly as he can talk, and he never repeats
anything.  "Now, Meneval," says he suddenly, "we shall stop here and
have a good night's rest."  And then, just as I am congratulating
myself, he adds, "and we shall continue with the dictation at three
to-morrow morning."  That is what he means by a good night's rest.'

'But has he no hours for his meals, Monsieur de Meneval?' I asked, as I
accompanied the unhappy secretary out of the tent.

'Oh, yes, he has hours, but he will not observe them.  You see that it
is already long after dinner time, but he has gone to this review.
After the review something else will probably take up his attention, and
then something else, until suddenly in the evening it will occur to him
that he has had no dinner.  "My dinner, Constant, this instant!" he will
cry, and poor Constant has to see that it is there.'

'But it must be unfit to eat by that time,' said I.

The secretary laughed in the discreet way of a man who has always been
obliged to control his emotions.

'This is the Imperial kitchen,' said he, indicating a large tent just
outside the headquarters.  'Here is Borel, the second cook, at the door.
How many pullets to-day, Borel?'

'Ah, Monsieur de Meneval, it is heartrending,' cried the cook.  'Behold
them!' and, drawing back the flap of the entrance, he showed us seven
dishes, each of them containing a cold fowl.  'The eighth is now on the
fire and done to a turn, but I hear that His Majesty has started for the
review, so we must put on a ninth.'

'That is how it is managed,' said my companion, as we turned from the
tent.  'I have known twenty-three fowls got ready for him before he
asked for his meal.  That day he called for his dinner at eleven at
night.  He cares little what he eats or drinks, but he will not be kept
waiting.  Half a bottle of Chambertin, a red mullet, or a pullet a la
Marengo satisfy every need, but it is unwise to put pastry or cream upon
the table, because he is as likely as not to eat it before the fowl.
Ah, that is a curious sight, is it not?'

I had halted with an exclamation of astonishment.  A groom was cantering
a very beautiful Arab horse down one of the lanes between the tents.
As it passed, a grenadier who was standing with a small pig under his
arm hurled it down under the feet of the horse.  The pig squealed
vigorously and scuttled away, but the horse cantered on without changing
its step.

'What does that mean?' I asked.

'That is Jardin, the head groom, breaking in a charger for the Emperor's
use.  They are first trained by having a cannon fired in their ears,
then they are struck suddenly by heavy objects, and finally they have
the test of the pig being thrown under their feet.  The Emperor has not
a very firm seat, and he very often loses himself in a reverie when be
is riding, so it might not be very safe if the horse were not well
trained.  Do you see that young man asleep at the door of a tent?'

'Yes, I see him.'

'You would not think that he is at the present moment serving the
Emperor?'

'It seems a very easy service.'

'I wish all our services were as easy, Monsieur de Laval.  That is
Joseph Linden, whose foot is the exact size of the Emperor's.  He wears
his new boots and shoes for three days before they are given to his
master.  You can see by the gold buckles that he has a pair on at the
present moment.  Ah, Monsieur de Caulaincourt, will you not join us at
dinner in my tent?'

A tall, handsome man, very elegantly dressed, came across and greeted
us.  'It is rare to find you at rest, Monsieur de Meneval.  I have no
very light task myself as head of the household, but I think I have more
leisure than you.  Have we time for dinner before the Emperor returns?'

'Yes, yes; here is the tent, and everything ready.  We can see when the
Emperor returns, and be in the room before he can reach it.  This  is
camp fare, Monsieur de Laval, but no doubt you will excuse it.'

For my own part I had an excellent appetite for the cutlets and the
salad, but what I relished above all was to hear the talk of my
companions, for I was full of curiosity as to everything which concerned
this singular man, whose genius had elevated him so rapidly to the
highest position in the world.  The head of his household discussed him
with an extraordinary frankness.

'What do they say of him in England, Monsieur de Laval?' he asked.

'Nothing very good.'

'So I have gathered from their papers.  They drive the Emperor frantic,
and yet he will insist upon reading them.  I am willing to lay a wager
that the very first thing which he does when he enters London will be to
send cavalry detachments to the various newspaper offices, and to
endeavour to seize the editors.'

'And the next?'

'The next,' said he, laughing, 'will be to issue a long proclamation to
prove that we have conquered England entirely for the good of the
English, and very much against our own inclinations.  And then, perhaps,
the Emperor will allow the English to understand that, if they
absolutely demand a Protestant for a ruler, it is possible that there
are a few little points in which he differs from Holy Church.'

'Too bad!  Too bad!' cried de Meneval, looking amused and yet rather
frightened at his companion's audacity.  'No doubt for state reasons the
Emperor had to tamper a little with Mahomedanism, and I daresay he would
attend this Church of St. Paul's as readily as he did the Mosque at
Cairo; but it would not do for a ruler to be a bigot.  After all, the
Emperor has to think for all.'

'He thinks too much,' said Caulaincourt, gravely.  'He thinks so much
that other people in France are getting out of the way of thinking at
all.  You know what I mean, de Meneval, for you have seen it as much as
I have.'

'Yes, yes,' answered the secretary.  'He certainly does not encourage
originality among those who surround him.  I have heard him say many a
time that he desired nothing but mediocrity, which was a poor
compliment, it must be confessed, to us who have the honour of serving
him.'

'A clever man at his Court shows his cleverness best by pretending to be
dull,' said Caulaincourt, with some bitterness.

'And yet there are many famous characters there,' I remarked.

'If so, it is only by concealing their characters that they remain
there.  His ministers are clerks, his generals are superior
aides-de-camp.  They are all agents.  You have this wonderful man in the
middle, and all around you have so many mirrors which reflect different
sides of him.  In one you see him as a financier, and you call it
Lebrun.  In another you have him as a _gendarme_, and you name it Savary
or Fouche.  In yet another he figures as a diplomatist, and is called
Talleyrand.  You see different figures, but it is really the same man.
There is a Monsieur de Caulaincourt, for example, who arranges the
household; but he cannot dismiss a servant without permission.  It is
still always the Emperor.  And he plays upon us.  We must confess, de
Meneval, that he plays upon us.  In nothing else do I see so clearly his
wonderful cleverness.  He will not let us be too friendly lest we
combine.  He has set his Marshals against each other until there are
hardly two of them on speaking terms.  Look how Davoust hates
Bernadotte, or Lannes and Bessieres, or Ney and Massena.  It is all they
can do to keep their sabres in they sheaths when they meet.  And then he
knows our weak points.  Savary's thirst for money, Cambaceres's vanity,
Duroc's bluntness, Berthier's foolishness, Maret's insipidity,
Talleyrand's mania for speculation, they are all so many tools in his
hand.  I do not know what my own greatest weakness may be, but I am sure
that he does, and that he uses his knowledge.'

'But how he must work!' I exclaimed.

'Ah, you may say so,' said de Meneval.  'What energy!  Eighteen hours
out of twenty-four for weeks on end.  He has presided over the
Legislative Council until they were fainting at their desks.  As to me,
he will be the death of me, just as he wore out de Bourrienne; but I
will die at my post without a murmur, for if he is hard upon us he is
hard upon himself also.'

'He was the man for France,' said de Caulaincourt.  'He is the very
genius of system and of order, and of discipline.  When one remembers
the chaos in which our poor country found itself after the Revolution,
when no one would be governed and everyone wanted to govern someone
else, you will understand that only Napoleon could have saved us.
We were all longing for something fixed to secure ourselves to, and then
we came upon this iron pillar of a man.  And what a man he was in those
days, Monsieur de Laval!  You see him now when he has got all that he
can want.  He is good-humoured and easy.  But at that time he had got
nothing, but coveted everything.  His glance frightened women.
He walked the streets like a wolf.  People looked after him as he
passed.  His face was quite different--it was craggy, hollow-cheeked,
with an oblique menacing gaze, and the jaws of a pike.  Oh, yes, this
little Lieutenant Buonaparte from the Military School of Brienne was a
singular figure.  "There is a man," said I, when I saw him, "who will
sit upon a throne or kneel upon a scaffold." And now look at him!'

'And that is ten years ago,' I exclaimed.

'Only ten years, and they have brought him from a barrack-room to the
Tuileries.  But he was born for it.  You could not keep him down.
De Bourrienne told me that when he was a little fellow at Brienne he had
the grand Imperial manner, and would praise or blame, glare or smile,
exactly as he does now.  Have you seen his mother, Monsieur de Laval?
She is a tragedy queen, tall, stern, reserved, silent.  There is the
spring from which he flowed.'

I could see in the gentle, spaniel-eyes of the secretary that he was
disturbed by the frankness of de Caulaincourt's remarks.

'You can tell that we do not live under a very terrible tyranny,
Monsieur de Laval,' said he, 'or we should hardly venture to discuss our
ruler so frankly.  The fact is that we have said nothing which he would
not have listened to with pleasure and perhaps with approval.  He has
his little frailties, or he would not be human, but take his qualities
as a ruler and I would ask you if there has ever been a man who has
justified the choice of a nation so completely.  He works harder than
any of his subjects.  He is a general beloved by his soldiers.  He is a
master beloved by his servants.  He never has a holiday, and he is
always ready for his work.  There is not under the roof of the Tuileries
a more abstemious eater or drinker.  He educated his brothers at his own
expense when he was a very poor man, and he has caused even his most
distant relatives to share in his prosperity.  In a word, he is
economical, hard-working, and temperate.  We read in the London papers
about this Prince of Wales, Monsieur de Laval, and I do not think that
he comes very well out of the comparison.'

I thought of the long record of Brighton scandals, London scandals,
Newmarket scandals, and I had to leave George undefended.

'As I understand it,' said I, 'it is not the Emperor's private life, but
his public ambition, that the English attack.'

'The fact is,' said de Caulaincourt, 'that the Emperor knows, and we all
know, that there is not room enough in the world for both France and
England.  One or other must be supreme.  If England were once crushed we
could then lay the foundations of a permanent peace.  Italy is ours.
Austria we can crush again as we have crushed her before.  Germany is
divided.  Russia can expand to the south and east.  America we can take
at our leisure, finding our pretext in Louisiana or in Canada.  There is
a world empire waiting for us, and there is the only thing that stops
us.'  He pointed out through the opening of the tent at the broad blue
Channel.

Far away, like snow-white gulls in the distance, were the sails of the
blockading fleet.  I thought again of what I had seen the night before--the
lights of the ships upon the sea and the glow of the camp upon the
shore.  The powers of the land and of the ocean were face to face whilst
a waiting world stood round to see what would come of it.



CHAPTER XII


THE MAN OF ACTION

De Meneval's tent had been pitched in such a way that he could overlook
the Royal headquarters, but whether it was that we were too absorbed in
the interest of our conversation, or that the Emperor had used the other
entrance in returning from the review, we were suddenly startled by the
appearance of a captain dressed in the green jacket of the Chasseurs of
the Guard, who had come to say that Napoleon was waiting for his
secretary.  Poor de Meneval's face turned as white as his beautiful
ruffles as he sprang to his feet, hardly able to speak for agitation.

'I should have been there!' he gasped.  'Oh, what a misfortune!
Monsieur de Caulaincourt, you must excuse me!  Where is my hat and my
sword?  Come, Monsieur de Laval, not an instant is to be lost!'

I could judge from the terror of de Meneval, as well as from the scene
which I had witnessed with Admiral Bruix, what the influence was which
the Emperor exercised over those who were around him.  They were never
at their ease, always upon the brink of a catastrophe, encouraged one
day only to be rudely rebuffed the next, bullied in public and slighted
in private, and yet, in spite of it all, the singular fact remains that
they loved him and served him as no monarch has been loved and served.

'Perhaps I had best stay here,' said I, when we had come to the
ante-chamber, which was still crowded with people.

'No, no, I am responsible for you.  You must come with me.  Oh, I trust
he is not offended with me!  How could he have got in without my seeing
him?'

My frightened companion scratched at the door, which was opened
instantly by Roustem the Mameluke, who guarded it within.  The room into
which we passed was of considerable size, but was furnished with extreme
simplicity.  It was papered of a silver-grey colour, with a sky-blue
ceiling, in the centre of which was the Imperial eagle in gold, holding
a thunderbolt.  In spite of the warm weather, a large fire was burning
at one side, and the air was heavy with heat and the aromatic smell of
aloes.  In the middle of the room was a large oval table covered with
green cloth and littered with a number of letters and papers.  A raised
writing-desk was at one side of the table, and behind it in a green
morocco chair with curved arms there sat the Emperor.  A number of
officials were standing round the walls, but he took no notice of them.
In his hand he had a small penknife, with which he whittled the wooden
knob at the end of his chair.  He glanced up as we entered, and shook
his head coldly at de Meneval.

'I have had to wait for you, Monsieur de Meneval,' said he.  'I cannot
remember that I ever waited for my late secretary de Bourrienne.
That is enough!  No excuses!  Take this report which I have written in
your absence, and make a copy of it.'

Poor de Meneval took the paper with a shaking hand, and carried it to
the little side table which was reserved for his use.  Napoleon rose
and paced slowly up and down the room with his hands behind his back,
and his big round head stooping a little forwards.  It was certainly as
well that he had a secretary, for I observed that in writing this single
document he had spattered the whole place with ink, and it was obvious
that he had twice used his white kerseymere knee-breeches as a
pen-wiper.  As for me, I stood quietly beside Roustem at the door, and
he took not the slightest notice of my presence.

'Well,' he cried presently, 'is it ready, de Meneval?  We have something
more to do.'

The secretary half turned in his chair, and his face was more agitated
than ever.

'If it please you, Sire--' he stammered.

'Well, well, what is the matter now?'

'If it please you, Sire, I find some little difficulty in reading what
you have written.'

'Tut, tut, sir.  You see what the report is about.'

'Yes, Sire, it is about forage for the cavalry horses.'

Napoleon smiled, and the action made his face look quite boyish.

'You remind me of Cambaceres, de Meneval.  When I wrote him an account
of the battle of Marengo, he thought that my letter was a rough plan of
the engagement.  It is incredible how much difficulty you appear to have
in reading what I write.  This document has nothing to do with cavalry
horses, but it contains the instructions to Admiral Villeneuve as to the
concentration of his fleet so as to obtain command of the Channel.
Give it to me and I will read it to you.'

He snatched the paper up in the quick impulsive way which was
characteristic of him.  But after a long fierce stare he crumpled it up
and hurled it under the table.

'I will dictate it to you,' said he; and, pacing up and down the long
room, he poured forth a torrent of words, which poor de Meneval, his
face shining with his exertions, strove hard to put upon paper.  As he
grew excited by his own ideas, Napoleon's voice became shriller, his
step faster, and he seized his right cuff in the fingers of the same
hand, and twisted his right arm in the singular epileptic gesture which
was peculiar to him.  But his thoughts and plans were so admirably clear
that even I, who knew nothing of the matter, could readily follow them,
while above all I was impressed by the marvellous grasp of fact which
enabled him to speak with confidence, not only of the line-of-battle
ships, but of the frigates, sloops, and brigs at Ferrol, Rochefort,
Cadiz, Carthagena, and Brest, with the exact strength of each in men and
in guns; while the names and force of the English vessels were equally
at his fingers' ends.  Such familiarity would have been remarkable in a
naval officer, but when I thought that this question of the ships was
only one out of fifty with which this man had to deal, I began to
realise the immense grasp of that capacious mind.  He did not appear to
be paying the least attention to me, but it seems that he was really
watching me closely, for he turned upon me when he had finished his
dictation.

'You appear to be surprised, Monsieur de Laval, that I should be able to
transact my naval business without having my minister of marine at my
elbow; but it is one of my rules to know and to do things for myself.
Perhaps if these good Bourbons had had the same habit they would not now
be living amidst the fogs of England.'

'One must have your Majesty's memory in order to do it,' I observed.

'It is the result of system,' said he.  'It is as if I had drawers in my
brain, so that when I opened one I could close the others.  It is seldom
that I fail to find what I want there.  I have a poor memory for names
or dates, but an excellent one for facts or faces.  There is a good deal
to bear in mind, Monsieur de Laval.  For example, I have, as you have
seen, my one little drawer full of the ships upon the sea.  I have
another which contains all the harbours and forts of France.  As an
example, I may tell you that when my minister of war was reading me a
report of all the coast defences, I was able to point out to him that he
had omitted two guns in a battery near Ostend.  In yet another of my
brain-drawers I have the regiments of France.  Is that drawer in order,
Marshal Berthier?'

A clean-shaven man, who had stood biting his nails in the window, bowed
at the Emperor's question.

'I am sometimes tempted to believe, Sire, that you know the name of
every man in the ranks,' said he.

'I think that I know most of my old Egyptian grumblers,' said he.
'And then, Monsieur de Laval, there is another drawer for canals,
bridges, roads, manufactures, and every detail of internal
administration.  The law, finance, Italy, the Colonies, Holland, all
these things demand drawers of their own.  In these days, Monsieur de
Laval, France asks something more of its ruler than that he should carry
eight yards of ermine with dignity, or ride after a stag in the forest
of Fontainebleau.'

I thought of the helpless, gentle, pompous Louis whom my father had once
taken me to visit, and I understood that France, after her convulsions
and her sufferings, did indeed require another and a stronger head.

'Do you not think so, Monsieur de Laval?' asked the Emperor.  He had
halted for a moment by the fire, and was grinding his dainty
gold-buckled shoe into one of the burning logs.

'You have come to a very wise decision,' said he when I had answered his
question.  'But you have always been of this way of thinking, have you
not?  Is it not true that you once defended me when some young
Englishman was drinking toasts to my downfall at an inn in this village
in which you lived?'

I remembered the incident, although I could not imagine how it had
reached his ears.

'Why should you have done this?'

'I did it on impulse, Sire.'

'On impulse!' he cried, in a tone of contempt.  'I do not know what
people mean when they say that they do things upon impulse.
In Charenton things are doubtless done upon impulse, but not amongst
sane people.  Why should you risk your life over there in defending me
when at the time you had nothing to hope for from me?'

'It was because I felt that you stood for France, Sire.'

During this conversation he had still walked up and down the room,
twisting his right arm about, and occasionally looking at one or other
of us with his eyeglass, for his sight was so weak that he always needed
a single glass indoors and binoculars outside.  Sometimes he stopped and
helped himself to great pinches of snuff from a tortoise-shell box, but
I observed that none of it ever reached his nose, for he dropped it all
from between his fingers on to his waistcoat and the floor.  My answer
seemed to please him, for he suddenly seized my ear and pulled it with
considerable violence.

'You are quite right, my friend,' said he.  'I stand for France just as
Frederic the Second stood for Prussia.  I will make her the great Power
of the world, so that every monarch in Europe will find it necessary to
keep a palace in Paris, and they will all come to hold the train at the
coronation of my descendants--' a spasm of pain passed suddenly over his
face.  'My God! for whom am I building?  Who will be my descendants?'
I heard him mutter, and he passed his hand over his forehead.

'Do they seem frightened in England about my approaching invasion?' he
asked suddenly.  'Have you heard them express fears lest I get across
the Channel?'

I was forced in truth to say that the only fears which I had ever heard
expressed were lest he should not get across.

'The soldiers are very jealous that the sailors should always have the
honour,' said I.

'But they have a very small army.'

'Nearly every man is a volunteer, Sire.'

'Pooh, conscripts!' he cried, and made a motion with his hands as if to
sweep them from before him.  I will land with a hundred thousand men in
Kent or in Sussex.  I will fight a great battle which I will win with a
loss of ten thousand men.  On the third day I shall be in London.
I will seize the statesmen, the bankers, the merchants, the newspaper
men.  I will impose an indemnity of a hundred millions of their pounds.
I will favour the poor at the expense of the rich, and so I shall have a
party.  I will detach Scotland and Ireland by giving them constitutions
which will put them in a superior condition to England.  Thus I will sow
dissensions everywhere.  Then as a price for leaving the island I will
claim their fleet and their colonies.  In this way I shall secure the
command of the world to France for at least a century to come.'

In this short sketch I could perceive the quality which I have since
heard remarked in Napoleon, that his mind could both conceive a large
scheme, and at the same time evolve those practical details which would
seem to bring it within the bounds of possibility.  One instant it would
be a wild dream of overrunning the East.  The next it was a schedule of
the ships, the ports, the stores, the troops, which would be needed to
turn dream into fact.  He gripped the heart of a question with the same
decision which made him strike straight for an enemy's capital.
The soul of a poet, and the mind of a man of business of the first
order, that is the combination which may make a man dangerous to the
world.

I think that it may have been his purpose--for he never did anything
without a purpose--to give me an object-lesson of his own capacity for
governing, with the idea, perhaps, that I might in turn influence others
of the Emigres by what I told them.  At any rate he left me there to
stand and to watch the curious succession of points upon which he had to
give an opinion during a few hours.  Nothing seemed to be either too
large or too small for that extraordinary mind.  At one instant it was
the arrangements for the winter cantonments of two hundred thousand men,
at the next he was discussing with de Caulaincourt the curtailing of the
expenses of the household, and the possibility of suppressing some of
the carriages.

'It is my desire to be economical at home so as to make a good show
abroad,' said he.  'For myself, when I had the honour to be a
sub-lieutenant I found that I could live very well upon 1,200 francs a
year, and it would be no hardship to me to go back to it.  This
extravagance of the palace must be stopped.  For example, I see upon
your accounts that 155 cups of coffee are drunk a day, which with sugar
at 4 francs and coffee at 5 francs a pound come to 20 sous a cup.
It would be better to make an allowance for coffee.  The stable bills
are also too high.  At the present price of fodder seven or eight francs
a week should be enough for each horse in a stable of two hundred.
I will not have any waste at the Tuileries.'

Thus within a few minutes he would pass from a question of milliards to
a question of sous, and from the management of a empire to that of a
stable.  From time to time I could observe that he threw a little
oblique glance at me as if to ask what I thought of it all, and at the
time I wondered very much why my approval should be of any consequence
to him.  But now, when I look back and see that my following his
fortunes brought over so many others of the young nobility, I understand
that he saw very much further than I did.

'Well, Monsieur de Laval,' said he suddenly, 'you have seen something of
my methods.  Are you prepared to enter my service?'

'Assuredly, Sire,' I answered.

'I can be a very hard master when I like,' said he smiling.  'You were
there when I spoke to Admiral Bruix.  We have all our duty to do, and
discipline is as necessary in the highest as in the lowest ranks.
But anger with me never rises above here,' and he drew his hand across
his throat.  'I never permit it to cloud my brain.  Dr. Corvisart here
would tell you that I have the slowest pulse of all his patients.'

'And that you are the fastest eater, Sire,' said a large-faced,
benevolent-looking person who had been whispering to Marshal Berthier.

'Ohe, you rascal, you rake that up against me, do you?  The Doctor will
not forgive me because I tell him when I am unwell that I had rather die
of the disease than of the remedies.  If I eat too fast it is the fault
of the State, which does not allow me more than a few minutes for my
meals.  Which reminds me that it must be rather after my dinner hour,
Constant?'

'It is four hours after it, Sire.'

'Serve it up then at once.'

'Yes, Sire.  Monsieur Isabey is outside, Sire, with his dolls.'

'Ah, we shall see them at once.  Show him in.'

A man entered who had evidently just arrived from a long journey.  Under
his arm he carried a large flat wickerwork basket.

'It is two days since I sent for you, Monsieur Isabey.'

'The courier arrived yesterday, Sire.  I have been travelling from Paris
ever since.'

'Have you the models there?'

'Yes, Sire.'

'Then you may lay them out on that table.'

I could not at first imagine what it meant when I saw, upon Isabey
opening his basket, that it was crammed with little puppets about a foot
high, all of them dressed in the most gorgeous silk and velvet costumes,
with trimmings of ermine and hangings of gold lace.  But presently, as
the designer took them out one by one and placed them on the table, I
understood that the Emperor, with his extraordinary passion for detail
and for directly controlling everything in his Court, had had these
dolls dressed in order to judge the effect of the gorgeous costumes
which had been ordered for his grand functionaries upon State occasions.

'What is this?' he asked, holding up a little lady in hunting costume of
amaranth and gold with a toque and plume of white feathers.

'That is for the Empress's hunt, Sire.'

'You should have the waist rather lower,' said Napoleon, who had very
definite opinions about ladies' dresses.  'These cursed fashions seem to
be the only thing in my dominions which I cannot regulate.  My tailor,
Duchesne, takes three inches from my coat-tails, and all the armies and
fleets of France cannot prevent him.  Who is this?'

He had picked up a very gorgeous figure in a green coat.

'That is the grand master of the hunt, Sire.'

'Then it is you, Berthier.  How do you like your new costume?  And this
in red?'

'That is the Arch-Chancellor.'

'And the violet?'

'That is the Grand Chamberlain.'

The Emperor was as much amused as a child with a new toy.  He formed
little groups of the figures upon the table, so that he might have an
idea of how the dignitaries would look when they chatted together.
Then he threw them all back into the basket.

'Very good,' said he.  'You and David have done your work very well,
Isabey.  You will submit these designs to the Court outfitters and have
an estimate for the expense.  You may tell Lenormand that if she
ventures to send in such an account as the last which she sent to the
Empress she shall see the inside of Vincennes.  You would not think it
right, Monsieur de Laval, to spend twenty-five thousand francs upon a
single dress, even though it were for Mademoiselle Eugenie de Choiseul.'

Was there anything which this wizard of a man did not know?  What could
my love affairs be to him amidst the clash of armies and the struggles
of nations?  When I looked at him, half in amazement and half in fear,
that pleasant boyish smile lit up his pale face, and his plump little
hand rested for an instant upon my shoulder.  His eyes were of a bright
blue when he was amused, though they would turn dark when he was
thoughtful, and steel-grey in moments of excitement.

'You were surprised when I told you a little while ago about your
encounter with the Englishman in the village inn.  You are still more
surprised now when I tell you about a certain young lady.  You must
certainly have thought that I was very badly served by my agents in
England if I did not know such important details as these.'

'I cannot conceive, Sire, why such trifles should be reported to you, or
why you should for one instant remember them.'

'You are certainly a very modest young man, and I hope you will not lose
that charming quality when you have been for a little time at my Court.
So you think that your own private affairs are of no importance to me?'

'I do not know why they should be, Sire.'

'What is the name of your great-uncle?'

'He is the Cardinal de Laval de Montmorency.'

'Precisely.  And where is he?'

'He is in Germany.'

'Quite so--in Germany, and not at Notre Dame, where I should have placed
him.  Who is your first cousin?'

'The Duke de Rohan.'

'And where is he?'

'In London.'

'Yes, in London, and not at the Tuileries, where he might have had what
he liked for the asking.  I wonder if I were to fall whether I should
have followers as faithful as those of the Bourbons.  Would the men that
I have made go into exile and refuse all offers until I should return?
Come here, Berthier!' he took his favourite by the ear with the
caressing gesture which was peculiar to him.  'Could I count upon you,
you rascal--eh?'

'I do not understand you, Sire.'  Our conversation had been carried on
in a voice which had made it inaudible to the other people in the room,
but now they were all listening to what Berthier had to say.

'If I were driven out, would you go into exile also?'

'No, Sire.'

'Diable! At least you are frank.'

'I could not go into exile, Sire.'

'And why?'

'Because I should be dead, Sire.'

Napoleon began to laugh.

'And there are some who say that our Berthier is dull-witted,' said he.
'Well, I think I am pretty sure of you, Berthier, for although I am fond
of you for reasons of my own I do not think that you would be of much
value to anyone else.  Now I could not say that of you, Monsieur
Talleyrand.  You would change very quickly to a new master as you have
changed from an old one.  You have a genius, you know, for adapting
yourself.'

There was nothing which the Emperor loved more than to suddenly produce
little scenes of this sort which made everybody very uncomfortable, for
no one could tell what awkward or compromising question he was going to
put to them next.  At present, however, they all forgot their own fears
of what might come in their interest at the reply which the famous
diplomatist might make to a suggestion which everybody knew to be so
true.  He stood, leaning upon his black ebony stick, with his bulky
shoulders stooping forward, and an amused smile upon his face, as if the
most innocent of compliments had been addressed to him.  One of his few
titles to respect is that he always met Napoleon upon equal terms, and
never condescended to fawn upon him or to flatter him.

'You think I should desert you, Sire, if your enemies offered me more
than you have given me?'

'I am perfectly sure that you would.'

'Well, really I cannot answer for myself, Sire, until the offer has been
made.  But it will have to be a very large one.  You see, apart from my
very nice hotel in the Rue St. Florentin, and the two hundred thousand
or so which you are pleased to allow me, there is my position as the
first minister in Europe.  Really, Sire, unless they put me on the
throne I cannot see how I can better my position.'

'No, I think I have you pretty safe,' said Napoleon, looking hard at him
with thoughtful eyes.  'By the way, Talleyrand, you must either marry
Madame Grand or get rid of her, for I cannot have a scandal about the
Court.'

I was astounded to hear so delicate and personal a matter discussed in
this public way, but this also was characteristic of the rule of this
extraordinary man, who proclaimed that he looked upon delicacy and good
taste as two of the fetters with which mediocrity attempted to cripple
genius.  There was no question of private life, from the choosing of a
wife to the discarding of a mistress, that this young conqueror of
thirty-six did not claim the right of discussing and of finally
settling.  Talleyrand broke once more into his benevolent but
inscrutable smile.

'I suppose that it is from early association, Sire,' said he, 'but my
instincts are to avoid marriage.'

Napoleon began to laugh.

'I forget sometimes that it is really the Bishop of Autun to whom I am
speaking,' said he.  'I think that perhaps I have interest enough with
the Pope to ask him, in return for any little attention which we gave
him at the Coronation, to show you some leniency in this matter.  She is
a clever woman, this Madame Grand.  I have observed that she listens
with attention.'

Talleyrand shrugged his rounded shoulders.  'Intellect in a woman is not
always an advantage, Sire.  A clever woman compromises her husband.
A stupid woman only compromises herself.'

'The cleverest woman,' said Napoleon, 'is the woman who is clever enough
to conceal her cleverness.  The women in France have always been a
danger, for they are cleverer than the men.  They cannot understand that
it is their hearts and not their heads that we want.  When they have had
influence upon a monarch, they have invariably ruined his career.  Look
at Henry the Fourth and Louis the Fourteenth.  They are all ideologists,
dreamers, sentimentalists, full of emotion and energy, but without logic
or foresight.  Look at that accursed Madame de Stael!  Look at the
Salons of the Quartier St. Germain!  Their eternal clack, clack, clack
give me more trouble than the fleet of England.  Why cannot they look
after their babies and their needlework?  I suppose you think that these
are very dreadful opinions, Monsieur de Laval?'

It was not an easy question to answer, so I was silent.

'You have not at your age become a practical man,' said the Emperor.
'You will understand then.  I dare say that I thought as you do at the
time when the stupid Parisians were saying what a misalliance the widow
of the famous General de Beauharnais was making by marrying the unknown
Buonaparte.  It was a beautiful dream!  There are nine inns in a single
day's journey between Milan and Mantua, and I wrote a letter to my wife
from each of them.  Nine letters in a day--but one becomes
disillusioned, monsieur.  One learns to accept things as they are.'

I could not but think what a beautiful young man he must have been
before he had learned to accept things as they are.  The glamour, the
romance--what a bald dead thing is life without it!  His own face had
clouded over as if that old life had perhaps had a charm which the
Emperor's crown had never given.  It may be that those nine letters
written in one day at wayside inns had brought him more true joy than
all the treaties by which he had torn provinces from his neighbours.
But the sentiment passed from his face, and he came back in his sudden
concise fashion to my own affairs.

'Eugenie de Choiseul is the niece of the Duc de Choiseul, is she not?'
he asked.

'Yes, Sire.'

'You are affianced!'

'Yes, Sire.'

He shook his head impatiently.

'If you wish to advance yourself in my Court, Monsieur de Laval,' said
he,' you must commit such matters to my care.  Is it likely that I can
look with indifference upon a marriage between emigres--an alliance
between my enemies?'

'But she shares my opinions, Sire.'

'Ta, ta, ta, at her age one has no opinions.  She has the emigre blood
in her veins, and it will come out.  Your marriage shall be my care,
Monsieur de Laval.  And I wish you to come to the Pont de Briques that
you may be presented to the Empress.  What is it, Constant?'

'There is a lady outside who desires to see your Majesty.  Shall I tell
her to come later?'

'A lady!' cried the Emperor smiling.  'We do not see many faces in the
camp which have not a moustache upon them.  Who is she?  What does she
want?'

'Her name, Sire, is Mademoiselle Sibylle Bernac.'

'What!' cried Napoleon.  'It must be the daughter of old Bernac of
Grosbois.  By the way, Monsieur de Laval, he is your uncle upon your
mother's side, is he not?'

I may have flushed with shame as I acknowledged it, for the Emperor read
my feelings.

'Well, well, he has not a very savoury trade, it is true, and yet I can
assure you that it is one which is very necessary to me.  By the way,
this uncle of yours, as I understand, holds the estates which should
have descended to you, does he not?'

'Yes, Sire.'

His blue eyes flashed suspicion at me.

'I trust that you are not joining my service merely in the hope of
having them restored to you.'

'No, Sire.  It is my ambition to make a career for myself.'

'It is a prouder thing,' said the Emperor, 'to found a family than
merely to perpetuate one.  I could not restore your estates, Monsieur de
Laval, for things have come to such a pitch in France that if one once
begins restorations the affair is endless.  It would shake all public
confidence.  I have no more devoted adherents than the men who hold land
which does not belong to them.  As long as they serve me, as your uncle
serves me, the land must remain with them.  But what can this young lady
require of me?  Show her in, Constant!'

An instant later my cousin Sibylle was conducted into the room.
Her face was pale and set, but her large dark eyes were filled with
resolution, and she carried herself like a princess.

'Well, mademoiselle, why do you come here?  What is it that you want?'
asked the Emperor in the brusque manner which he adopted to women, even
if he were wooing them.

Sibylle glanced round, and as our eyes met for an instant I felt that my
presence had renewed her courage.  She looked bravely at the Emperor as
she answered him.

'I come, Sire, to implore a favour of you.'

'Your father's daughter has certainly claims upon me, mademoiselle.
What is it that you wish?'

'I do not ask it in my father's name, but in my own.  I implore you,
Sire, to spare the life of Monsieur Lucien Lesage, who was arrested
yesterday upon a charge of treason.  He is a student, Sire--a mere
dreamer who has lived away from the world and has been made a tool by
designing men.'

'A dreamer!' cried the Emperor harshly.  'They are the most dangerous of
all.'  He took a bundle of notes from his table and glanced them over.
'I presume that he is fortunate enough to be your lover, mademoiselle?'

Sibylle's pale face flushed, and she looked down before the Emperor's
keen sardonic glance.

'I have his examination here.  He does not come well out of it.  I
confess that from what I see of the young man's character I should not
say that he is worthy of your love.'

'I implore you to spare him, Sire.'

'What you ask is impossible, mademoiselle.  I have been conspired
against from two sides--by the Bourbons and by the Jacobins.  Hitherto I
have been too long-suffering, and they have been encouraged by my
patience.  Since Cadoudal and the Due d'Enghien died the Bourbons have
been quiet.  Now I must teach the same lesson to these others.'

I was astonished and am still astonished at the passion with which my
brave and pure cousin loved this cowardly and low-minded man, though it
is but in accordance with that strange law which draws the extremes of
nature together.  As she heard the Emperor's stern reply the last sign
of colour faded from her pale face, and her eyes were dimmed with
despairing tears, which gleamed upon her white cheeks like dew upon the
petals of a lily.

'For God's sake, Sire!  For the love of your mother spare him!' she
cried, falling upon her knees at the Emperor's feet.  'I will answer for
him that he never offends you again.'

'Tut, tut!' cried Napoleon angrily, turning upon his heel and walking
impatiently up and down the room.  'I cannot grant you what you ask,
mademoiselle.  When I say so once it is finished.  I cannot have my
decisions in high matters of State affected by the intrusion of women.
The Jacobins have been dangerous of late, and an example must be made or
we shall have the Faubourg St. Antoine upon our hands once more.'

The Emperors set face and firm manner showed it was hopeless, and yet my
cousin persevered as no one but a woman who pleads for her lover would
have dared to do.

'He is harmless, Sire.'

'His death will frighten others.'

'Spare him and I will answer for his loyalty.'

'What you ask is impossible.'

Constant and I raised her from the ground.

'That is right, Monsieur de Laval,' said the Emperor.  'This interview
can lead to nothing.  Remove your cousin from the room!'

But she had again turned to him with a face which showed that even now
all hope had not been abandoned.

'Sire,' she cried.  'You say that an example must be made.  There is
Toussac--!'

'Ah, if I could lay my hands upon Toussac!'

'He is the dangerous man.  It was he and my father who led Lucien on.
If an example must be made it should be an example of the guilty rather
than of the innocent.'

'They are both guilty.  And, besides, we have our hands upon the one but
not upon the other.'

'But if I could find him?'

Napoleon thought for a moment.

'If you do,' said he, 'Lesage will be forgiven!'

'But I cannot do it in a day.'

'How long do you ask?'

'A week at the least.'

'Then he has a respite of a week.  If you can find Toussac in the time,
Lesage will be pardoned.  If not he will die upon the eighth day.  It is
enough.  Monsieur de Laval, remove your cousin, for I have matters of
more importance to attend to.  I shall expect you one evening at the
Pont de Briques, when you are ready to be presented to the Empress.'



CHAPTER XIII


THE MAN OF DREAMS

When I had escorted my cousin Sibylle from the presence of the Emperor,
I was surprised to find the same young hussar officer waiting outside
who had commanded the guard which had brought me to the camp.

'Well, mademoiselle, what luck?' he asked excitedly, clanking towards
us.

For answer Sibylle shook her head.

'Ah, I feared as much, for the Emperor is a terrible man.  It was brave,
indeed, of you to attempt it.  I had rather charge an unshaken square
upon a spent horse than ask him for anything.  But my heart is heavy,
mademoiselle, that you should have been unsuccessful.'  His boyish blue
eyes filled with tears and his fair moustache drooped in such a
deplorable fashion, that I could have laughed had the matter been less
serious.

'Lieutenant Gerard chanced to meet me, and escorted me through the
camp,' said my cousin.  'He has been kind enough to give me sympathy in
my trouble.'

'And so do I, Sibylle,' I cried; 'you carried yourself like an angel,
and it is a lucky man who is blessed with your love.  I trust that he
may be worthy of it.'

She turned cold and proud in an instant when anyone threw a doubt upon
this wretched lover of hers.

'I know him as neither the Emperor nor you can do,' said she.  'He has
the heart and soul of a poet, and he is too high-minded to suspect the
intrigues to which he has fallen a victim.  But as to Toussac, I should
have no pity upon him, for I know him to be a murderer five times over,
and I know also that there will be no peace in France until he has been
taken.  Cousin Louis, will you help me to do it?'

The lieutenant had been tugging at his moustache and looking me up and
down with a jealous eye.

'Surely, mademoiselle, you will permit me to help you?' he cried in a
piteous voice.

'I may need you both,' said she.  'I will come to you if I do.  Now I
will ask you to ride with me to the edge of the camp and there to leave
me.'

She had a quick imperative way which came charmingly from those sweet
womanly lips.  The grey horse upon which I had come to the camp was
waiting beside that of the hussar, so we were soon in the saddle.
When we were clear of the huts my cousin turned to us.

'I had rather go alone now,' said she.  'It is understood, then, that I
can rely upon you.'

'Entirely,' said I.

'To the death,' cried Gerard.

'It is everything to me to have two brave men at my back,' said she, and
so, with a smile, gave her horse its head and cantered off over the
downland in the direction of Grosbois.

For my part I remained in thought for some time, wondering what plan she
could have in her head by which she hoped to get upon the track of
Toussac.  A woman's wit, spurred by the danger of her lover, might
perhaps succeed where Fouche and Savary had failed.  When at last I
turned my horse I found my young hussar still staring after the distant
rider.

'My faith!  There is the woman for you, Etienne!' he kept repeating.
'What an eye!  What a smile!  What a rider!  And she is not afraid of
the Emperor.  Oh, Etienne, here is the woman who is worthy of you!'

These were the little sentences which he kept muttering to himself until
she vanished over the hill, when he became conscious at last of my
presence.

'You are mademoiselle's cousin?' he asked.  'You are joined with me in
doing something for her.  I do not yet know what it is, but I am
perfectly ready to do it.'

'It is to capture Toussac.'

'Excellent!'

'In order to save the life of her lover.'

There was a struggle in the face of the young hussar, but his more
generous nature won.

'Sapristi! I will do even that if it will make her the happier!' he
cried, and he shook the hand which I extended towards him.  'The Hussars
of Bercheny are quartered over yonder, where you see the lines of
picketed horses.  If you will send for Lieutenant Etienne Gerard you
will find a sure blade always at your disposal.  Let me hear from you
then, and the sooner the better!'  He shook his bridle and was off, with
youth and gallantry in every line of him, from his red toupet and
flowing dolman to the spur which twinkled on his heel.

But for four long days no word came from my cousin as to her quest, nor
did I hear from this grim uncle of mine at the Castle of Grosbois.
For myself I had gone into the town of Boulogne and had hired such a
room as my thin purse could afford over the shop of a baker named Vidal,
next to the Church of St. Augustin, in the Rue des Vents.  Only last
year I went back there under that strange impulse which leads the old to
tread once more with dragging feet the same spots which have sounded to
the crisp tread of their youth.  The room is still there, the very
pictures and the plaster head of Jean Bart which used to stand upon the
side table.  As I stood with my back to the narrow window, I had around
me every smallest detail upon which my young eyes had looked; nor was I
conscious that my own heart and feelings had undergone much change.  And
yet there, in the little round glass which faced me, was the long drawn,
weary face of an aged man, and out of the window, when I turned, were
the bare and lonely downs which had been peopled by that mighty host of
a hundred and fifty thousand men.  To think that the Grand Army should
have vanished away like a shredding cloud upon a windy day, and yet that
every sordid detail of a bourgeois lodging should remain unchanged!
Truly, if man is not humble it is not for want of having his lesson
taught to him by Nature.

My first care after I had chosen my room was to send to Grosbois for
that poor little bundle which I had carried ashore with me that squally
night from the English lugger.  My next was to use the credit which my
favourable reception by the Emperor and his assurance of employment had
given me in order to obtain such a wardrobe as would enable me to appear
without discredit among the richly dressed courtiers and soldiers who
surrounded him.  It was well known that it was his whim that he should
himself be the only plainly-dressed man in the company, and that in the
most luxurious times of the Bourbons there was never a period when fine
linen and a brave coat were more necessary for a man who would keep in
favour.  A new court and a young empire cannot afford to take anything
for granted.

It was upon the morning of the fifth day that I received a message from
Duroc, who was the head of the household, that I was to attend the
Emperor at the headquarters in the camp, and that a seat in one of the
Imperial carriages would be at my disposal that I might proceed with the
Court to Pont de Briques, there to be present at the reception of the
Empress.  When I arrived I was shown at once through the large entrance
tent, and admitted by Constant into the room beyond, where the Emperor
stood with his back to the fire, kicking his heels against the grate.
Talleyrand and Berthier were in attendance, and de Meneval, the
secretary, sat at the writing-table.

'Ah, Monsieur de Laval,' said the Emperor with a friendly nod.
'Have you heard anything yet of your charming cousin?'

'Nothing, Sire,' I answered.

'I fear that her efforts will be in vain.  I wish her every success, for
we have no reason at all to fear this miserable poet, while the other is
formidable.  All the same, an example of some sort must be made.'

The darkness was drawing in, and Constant had appeared with a taper to
light the candles, but the Emperor ordered him out.

'I like the twilight,' said he.  'No doubt, Monsieur de Laval, after
your long residence in England you find yourself also most at home in a
dim light.  I think that the brains of these people must be as dense as
their fogs, to judge by the nonsense which they write in their accursed
papers.'  With one of those convulsive gestures which accompanied his
sudden outbursts of passion he seized a sheaf of late London papers from
the table, and ground them into the fire with his heel.  'An editor!' he
cried in the guttural rasping voice which I had heard when I first met
him.  'What is he?  A dirty man with a pen in a back office.  And he
will talk like one of the great Powers of Europe.  I have had enough of
this freedom of the Press.  There are some who would like to see it
established in Paris.  You are among them, Talleyrand.  For my part I
see no need for any paper at all except the _Moniteur_ by which the
Government may make known its decisions to the people.'

'I am of opinion, Sire,' said the minister, 'that it is better to have
open foes than secret ones, and that it is less dangerous to shed ink
than blood.  What matter if your enemies have leave to rave in a few
Paris papers, as long as you are at the head of five hundred thousand
armed men?'

'Ta, ta, ta!' cried the Emperor impatiently.  'You speak as if I had
received my crown from my father the late king.  But even if I had, it
would be intolerable, this government by newspaper.  The Bourbons
allowed themselves to be criticised, and where are they now?  Had they
used their Swiss Guards as I did the Grenadiers upon the eighteenth
Brumaire what would have become of their precious National Assembly?
There was a time when a bayonet in the stomach of Mirabeau might have
settled the whole matter.  Later it took the heads of a king and queen
and the blood of a hundred thousand people.'

He sat down, and stretched his plump, white-clad legs towards the fire.
Through the blackened shreds of the English papers the red glow beat
upwards upon the beautiful, pallid, sphinx-like face--the face of a
poet, of a philosopher--of anything rather than of a ruthless and
ambitious soldier.  I have heard folk remark that no two portraits of
the Emperor are alike, and the fault does not lie with the artists but
with the fact that every varying mood made him a different man.  But in
his prime, before his features became heavy, I, who have seen sixty
years of mankind, can say that in repose I have never looked upon a more
beautiful face.

'You have no dreams and no illusions, Talleyrand,' said he.  'You are
always practical, cold, and cynical.  But with me, when I am in the
twilight, as now, or when I hear the sound of the sea, my imagination
begins to work.  It is the same when I hear some music--especially music
which repeats itself again and again like some pieces of Passaniello.
They have a strange effect upon me, and I begin to Ossianise.  I get
large ideas and great aspirations.  It is at such times that my mind
always turns to the East, that swarming ant-heap of the human race,
where alone it is possible to be very great.  I renew my dreams of '98.
I think of the possibility of drilling and arming these vast masses of
men, and of precipitating them upon Europe.  Had I conquered Syria I
should have done this, and the fate of the world was really decided at
the siege of Acre.  With Egypt at my feet I already pictured myself
approaching India, mounted upon an elephant, and holding in my hand a
new version of the Koran which I had myself composed.  I have been born
too late.  To be accepted as a world's conqueror one must claim to be
divine.  Alexander declared himself to be the son of Jupiter, and no one
questioned it.  But the world has grown old, and has lost its
enthusiasms.  What would happen if I were to make the same claim?
Monsieur de Talleyrand would smile behind his hand, and the Parisians
would write little lampoons upon the walls.'

He did not appear to be addressing us, but rather to be expressing his
thoughts aloud, while allowing them to run to the most fantastic and
extravagant lengths.  This it was which he called Ossianising, because
it recalled to him the wild vague dreams of the Gaelic Ossian, whose
poems had always had a fascination for him.  De Meneval has told me that
for an hour at a time he has sometimes talked in this strain of the most
intimate thoughts and aspirations of his heart, while his courtiers have
stood round in silence waiting for the instant when he would return once
more to his practical and incisive self.

'The great ruler,' said he, 'must have the power of religion behind him
as well as the power of the sword.  It is more important to command the
souls than the bodies of men.  The Sultan, for example, is the head of
the faith as well as of the army.  So were some of the Roman Emperors.
My position must be incomplete until this is accomplished.  At the
present instant there are thirty departments in France where the Pope is
more powerful than I am.  It is only by universal dominion that peace
can be assured in the world.  When there is only one authority in
Europe, seated at Paris, and when all the kings are so many lieutenants
who hold their crowns from the central power of France, it is then that
the reign of peace will be established.  Many powers of equal strength
must always lead to struggles until one becomes predominant.  Her
central position, her wealth and her history, all mark France out as
being the power which will control and regulate the others.  Germany is
divided.   Russia is barbarous.  England is insular.  France only
remains.'

I began to understand as I listened to him that my friends in England
had not been so far wrong when they had declared that as long as he
lived--this little thirty-six year old artilleryman--there could not
possibly be any peace in the world.  He drank some coffee which Constant
had placed upon the small round table at his elbow.  Then he leaned back
in his chair once more, still staring moodily at the red glow of the
fire, with his chin sunk upon his chest.

'In those days,' said he, 'the kings of Europe will walk behind the
Emperor of France in order to hold up his train at his coronation. Each
of them will have to maintain a palace in Paris, and the city will
stretch as far as Versailles.  These are the plans which I have made for
Paris if she will show herself to be worthy of them. But I have no love
for them, these Parisians, and they have none for me, for they cannot
forget that I turned my guns upon them once before, and they know that I
am ready to do so again.  I have made them admire me and fear me, but I
have never made them like me.  Look what I have done for them.  Where
are the treasures of Genoa, the pictures and statues of Venice and of
the Vatican?  They are in the Louvre.  The spoils of my victories have
gone to decorate her.  But they must always be changing, always
chattering.  They wave their hats at me now, but they would soon be
waving their fists if I did not give them something to talk over and to
wonder at.  When other things are quiet, I have the dome of the
Invalides regilded to keep their thoughts from mischief.  Louis XIV.
gave them wars.   Louis XV. gave them the gallantries and scandals of
his Court.  Louis XVI. gave them nothing, so they cut off his head. It
was you who helped to bring him to the scaffold, Talleyrand.'

'No, Sire, I was always a moderate.'

'At least, you did not regret his death.'

'The less so, since it has made room for you,
Sire.'

'Nothing could have held me down, Talleyrand.  I was born to reach
the highest.  It has always been the same with me.  I remember when
we were arranging the Treaty of Campo Formio--I a young general under
thirty--there was a high vacant throne with the Imperial arms in the
Commissioner's tent.  I instantly sprang up the steps, and threw myself
down upon it. I could not endure to think that there was anything above
myself.  And all the time I knew in my heart all that was going to
happen to me.  Even in the days when my brother Lucien and I lived in
a little room upon a few francs a week, I knew perfectly well that the
day would come when I should stand where I am now.  And yet I had no
prospects and no reason for any great hopes.  I was not clever at school.
I was only the forty-second out of fifty-eight.  At mathematics I had
perhaps some ability, but at nothing else.  The truth is that I was
always dreaming when the others were working.  There was nothing to
encourage my ambition, for the only thing which I inherited from my
father was a weak stomach.  Once, when I was very young, I went up to
Paris with my father and my sister Caroline. We were in the Rue
Richelieu, and we saw the king pass in his carriage. Who would have
thought that the little boy from Corsica, who took his hat off and
stared, was destined to be the next monarch of France? And yet even then
I felt as if that carriage ought to belong to me. What is it, Constant?'

The discreet valet bent down and whispered something to the Emperor.

'Ah, of course,' said he.  'It was an appointment.  I had forgotten it.
Is she there?'

'Yes, Sire.'

'In the side room?'

'Yes, Sire.'

Talleyrand and Berthier exchanged glances, and the minister began to
move towards the door.

'No, no, you can remain here,' said the Emperor.  'Light the lamps,
Constant, and have the carriages ready in half-an-hour.  Look over this
draft of a letter to the Emperor of Austria, and let me have your
observations upon it, Talleyrand.  De Meneval, there is a lengthy report
here as to the new dockyard at Brest.  Extract what is essential from
it, and leave it upon my desk at five o'clock to-morrow morning.
Berthier, I will have the whole army into the boats at seven.  We will
see if they can embark within three hours.  Monsieur de Laval, you will
wait here until we start for Pont de Briques.'  So with a crisp order to
each of us, he walked with little swift steps across the room, and I saw
his square green back and white legs framed for an instant in the
doorway.  There was the flutter of a pink skirt beyond, and then the
curtains closed behind him.

Berthier stood biting his nails, while Talleyrand looked at him with a
slight raising of his bushy eyebrows.  De Meneval with a rueful face was
turning over the great bundle of papers which had to be copied by
morning.  Constant, with a noiseless tread, was lighting the candles
upon the sconces round the room.

'Which is it?' I heard the minister whisper.

'The girl from the Imperial Opera,' said Berthier.

'Is the little Spanish lady out of favour then?'

'No, I think not.  She was here yesterday.'

'And the other, the Countess?'

'She has a cottage at Ambleteuse.'

'But we must have no scandal about the Court,' said Talleyrand, with a
sour smile, recalling the moral sentiments with which the Emperor had
reproved him.  'And now, Monsieur de Laval,' he added, drawing me aside,
'I very much wish to hear from you about the Bourbon party in England.
You must have heard their views.  Do they imagine that they have any
chance of success?'

And so for ten minutes he plied me with questions, which showed me
clearly that the Emperor had read him aright, and that he was
determined, come what might, to be upon the side which won.  We were
still talking when Constant entered hurriedly, with a look of anxiety
and perplexity which I could not have imagined upon so smooth and
imperturbable a face.

'Good Heavens, Monsieur Talleyrand,' he cried, clasping and unclasping
his hands.  'Such a misfortune!  Who could have expected it?'

'What is it, then, Constant?'

'Oh, Monsieur, I dare not intrude upon the Emperor.  And yet--And yet--The
Empress is outside, and she is coming in.'



CHAPTER XIV


JOSEPHINE

At this unexpected announcement Talleyrand and Berthier looked at each
other in silence, and for once the trained features of the great
diplomatist, who lived behind a mask, betrayed the fact that he was
still capable of emotion.  The spasm which passed over them was caused,
however, rather by mischievous amusement than by consternation, while
Berthier--who had an honest affection for both Napoleon and Josephine--ran
frantically to the door as if to bar the Empress from entering.
Constant rushed towards the curtains which screened the Emperor's room,
and then, losing courage, although he was known to be a stout-hearted
man, he came running back to Talleyrand for advice.  It was too late
now, however, for Roustem the Mameluke had opened the door, and two
ladies had entered the room.  The first was tall and graceful, with a
smiling face, and an affable though dignified manner.  She was dressed
in a black velvet cloak with white lace at the neck and sleeves, and she
wore a black hat with a curling white feather.  Her companion was
shorter, with a countenance which would have been plain had it not been
for the alert expression and large dark eyes, which gave it charm and
character.  A small black terrier dog had followed them in, but the
first lady turned and handed the thin steel chain with which she led it
to the Mameluke attendant.

'You had better keep Fortune outside, Roustem,' said she, in a
peculiarly sweet musical voice.  'The Emperor is not very fond of dogs,
and if we intrude upon his quarters we cannot do less than consult his
tastes.  Good evening, Monsieur de Talleyrand!  Madame de Remusat and I
have driven all along the cliffs, and we have stopped as we passed to
know if the Emperor is coming to Pont de Briques.  But perhaps he has
already started.  I had expected to find him here.'

'His Imperial Majesty was here a short time ago,' said Talleyrand,
bowing and rubbing his hands.

'I hold my _salon_--such a _salon_ as Pont de Briques is capable of--this
evening, and the Emperor promised me that he would set his work
aside for once, and favour us with his presence.  I wish we could
persuade him to work less, Monsieur de Talleyrand.  He has a frame of
iron, but he cannot continue in this way.  These nervous attacks come
more frequently upon him.  He will insist upon doing everything,
everything himself.  It is noble, but it is to be a martyr.  I have no
doubt that at the present moment--but you have not yet told me where he
is, Monsieur de Talleyrand.'

'We expect him every instant, your Majesty.'

'In that case we shall sit down and await his return.  Ah, Monsieur de
Meneval, how I pity you when I see you among all those papers!  I was
desolate when Monsieur de Bourrienne deserted the Emperor, but you have
more than taken his place.  Come up to the fire, Madame de Remusat!
Yes, yes, I insist upon it, for I know that you must be cold.  Constant,
come and put the rug under Madame de Remusat's feet.'

It was by little acts of thoughtfulness and kindness like this that the
Empress so endeared herself that she had really no enemies in France,
even among those who were most bitterly opposed to her husband.  Whether
as the consort of the first man in Europe, or as the lonely divorced
woman eating her heart out at Malmaison, she was always praised and
beloved by those who knew her.  Of all the sacrifices which the Emperor
ever made to his ambition that of his wife was the one which cost him
the greatest struggle and the keenest regret.

Now as she sat before the fire in the same chair which had so recently
been occupied by the Emperor, I had an opportunity of studying this
person, whose strange fate had raised her from being the daughter of a
lieutenant of artillery to the first position among the women of Europe.
She was six years older than Napoleon, and on this occasion, when I saw
her first, she was in her forty-second year; but at a little distance or
in a discreet light, it was no courtier's flattery to say that she might
very well have passed for thirty.  Her tall, elegant figure was girlish
in its supple slimness, and she had an easy and natural grace in every
movement, which she inherited with her tropical West Indian blood.  Her
features were delicate, and I have heard that in her youth she was
strikingly beautiful; but, like most Creole women, she had become
_passee_ in early middle age.  She had made a brave fight, however--with
art as her ally--against the attacks of time, and her success had been
such that when she sat aloof upon a dais or drove past in a procession,
she might still pass as a lovely woman.  In a small room, however, or in
a good light, the crude pinks and whites with which she had concealed
her sallow cheeks became painfully harsh and artificial.  Her own
natural beauty, however, still lingered in that last refuge of beauty--the
eyes, which were large, dark, and sympathetic.  Her mouth, too, was
small and amiable, and her most frequent expression was a smile, which
seldom broadened into a laugh, as she had her own reasons for preferring
that her teeth should not be seen.  As to her bearing, it was so
dignified, that if this little West Indian had come straight from the
loins of Charlemagne, it could not have been improved upon.  Her walk,
her glance, the sweep of her dress, the wave of her hand--they had all
the happiest mixture of the sweetness of a woman and the condescension
of a queen.  I watched her with admiration as she leaned forward,
picking little pieces of aromatic aloes wood out of the basket and
throwing them on to the fire.

'Napoleon likes the smell of burning aloes,' said she.  'There was never
anyone who had such a nose as he, for he can detect things which are
quite hidden from me.'

'The Emperor has an excellent nose for many things,' said Talleyrand.
'The State contractors have found that out to their cost.'

'Oh, it is dreadful when he comes to examine accounts--dreadful,
Monsieur de Talleyrand!  Nothing escapes him.  He will make no
allowances.  Everything must be exact.  But who is this young gentleman,
Monsieur de Talleyrand?  I do not think that he has been presented to
me.'

The minister explained in a few words that I had been received into the
Emperor's personal service, and Josephine congratulated me upon it with
the most kindly sympathy.

'It eases my mind so to know that he has brave and loyal men round him.
Ever since that dreadful affair of the infernal machine I have always
been uneasy if he is away from me.  He is really safest in time of war,
for it is only then that he is away from the assassins who hate him.
And now I understand that a new Jacobin plot has only just been
discovered.'

'This is the same Monsieur de Laval who was there when the conspirator
was taken,' said Talleyrand.

The Empress overwhelmed me with questions, hardly waiting for the
answers in her anxiety.

'But this dreadful man Toussac has not been taken yet,' she cried.
'Have I not heard that a young lady is endeavouring to do what has
baffled the secret police, and that the freedom of her lover is to be
the reward of her success?'

'She is my cousin, your Imperial Majesty.  Mademoiselle Sibylle Bernac
is her name.'

'You have only been in France a few days, Monsieur de Laval,' said
Josephine, smiling, 'but it seems to me that all the affairs of the
Empire are already revolving round you.  You must bring this pretty
cousin of yours--the Emperor said that she is pretty--to Court with you,
and present her to me.  Madame de Remusat, you will take a note of the
name.'

The Empress had stooped again to the basket of aloes wood which stood
beside the fireplace.  Suddenly I saw her stare hard at something, and
then, with a little cry of surprise, she stooped and lifted an object
from the carpet.  It was the Emperor's soft flat beaver with the little
tricolour cockade.  Josephine sprang up, and looked from the hat in her
hand to the imperturbable face of the minister.

'How is this, Monsieur de Talleyrand,' she cried, and the dark eyes
began to shine with anger and suspicion.  'You said to me that the
Emperor was out, and here is his hat!'

'Pardon me, your Imperial Majesty, I did not say that he was out.'

'What did you say then?'

'I said that he left the room a short time before.'

'You are endeavouring to conceal something from me,' she cried, with the
quick instinct of a woman.

'I assure you that I tell you all I know.'

The Empress's eyes darted from face to face.

'Marshal Berthier,' she cried, 'I insist upon your telling me this
instant where the Emperor is, and what he is doing.'

The slow-witted soldier stammered and twisted his cocked hat about.

'I know no more than Monsieur de Talleyrand does,' said he; 'the Emperor
left us some time ago.'

'By which door?'

Poor Berthier was more confused than ever.

'Really, your Imperial Majesty, I cannot undertake to say by which door
it was that the Emperor quitted the apartment.'

Josephine's eyes flashed round at me, and my heart shrunk within me as I
thought that she was about to ask me that same dreadful question.  But I
had just time to breathe one prayer to the good Saint Ignatius, who has
always been gracious to our family, and the danger passed.

'Come, Madame de Remusat,' said she.  'If these gentlemen will not tell
us we shall very soon find out for ourselves.'

She swept with great dignity towards the curtained door, followed at the
distance of a few yards by her waiting lady, whose frightened face and
lagging, unwilling steps showed that she perfectly appreciated the
situation.  Indeed, the Emperor's open infidelities, and the public
scenes to which they gave rise, were so notorious, that even in Ashford
they had reached our ears.  Napoleon's self-confidence and his contempt
of the world had the effect of making him careless as to what was
thought or said of him, while Josephine, when she was carried away by
jealousy, lost all the dignity and restraint which usually marked her
conduct; so between them they gave some embarrassing moments to those
who were about them.  Talleyrand turned away with his fingers over his
lips, while Berthier, in an agony of apprehension, continued to double
up and to twist the cocked hat which he held between his hands.  Only
Constant, the faithful valet, ventured to intervene between his mistress
and the fatal door.

'If your Majesty will resume your seat I shall inform the Emperor that
you are here,' said he, with two deprecating hands outstretched.

'Ah, then he _is_ there!' she cried furiously.  'I see it all!
I understand it all!  But I will expose him--I will reproach him with
his perfidy!  Let me pass, Constant!  How dare you stand in my way?'

'Allow me to announce you, your Majesty.'

'I shall announce myself.'  With swift undulations of her beautiful
figure she darted past the protesting valet, parted the curtains, threw
open the door, and vanished into the next room.

She had seemed a creature full of fire and of spirit as, with a flush
which broke through the paint upon her cheeks, and with eyes which
gleamed with the just anger of an outraged wife, she forced her way into
her husband's presence.  But she was a woman of change and impulse, full
of little squirts of courage and corresponding reactions into cowardice.
She had hardly vanished from our sight when there was a harsh roar, like
an angry beast, and next instant Josephine came flying into the room
again, with the Emperor, inarticulate with passion, raving at her heels.
So frightened was she, that she began to run towards the fireplace, upon
which Madame de Remusat, who had no wish to form a rearguard upon such
an occasion, began running also, and the two of them, like a pair of
startled hens, came rustling and fluttering back to the seats which they
had left.  There they cowered whilst the Emperor, with a convulsed face
and a torrent of camp-fire oaths, stamped and raged about the room.

'You, Constant, you!' he shouted; 'is this the way in which you serve
me?  Have you no sense then--no discretion?  Am I never to have any
privacy?  Must I eternally submit to be spied upon by women?
Is everyone else to have liberty, and I only to have none?  As to you,
Josephine, this finishes it all.  I had hesitations before, but now I
have none.  This brings everything to an end between us.'

We would all, I am sure, have given a good deal to slip from the room--at
least, my own embarrassment far exceeded my interest--but the Emperor
from his lofty standpoint cared as little about our presence as if we
had been so many articles of furniture.  In fact, it was one of this
strange man's peculiarities that it was just those delicate and personal
scenes with which privacy is usually associated that he preferred to
have in public, for he knew that his reproaches had an additional sting
when they fell upon other ears besides those of his victim.  From his
wife to his groom there was not one of those who were about him who did
not live in dread of being held up to ridicule and infamy before a
smiling crowd, whose amusement was only tempered by the reflection that
each of them might be the next to endure the same exposure.

As to Josephine, she had taken refuge in a woman's last resource, and
was crying bitterly, with her graceful neck stooping towards her knees
and her two hands over her face.  Madame de Remusat was weeping also,
and in every pause of his hoarse scolding--for his voice was very hoarse
and raucous when he was angry--there came the soft hissing and clicking
of their sobs.  Sometimes his fierce taunts would bring some reply from
the Empress, some gentle reproof to him for his gallantries, but each
remonstrance only excited him to a fresh rush of vituperation.  In one
of his outbursts he threw his snuff-box with a crash upon the floor as a
spoiled child would hurl down its toys.

'Morality!' he cried, 'morality was not made for me, and I was not made
for morality.  I am a man apart, and I accept nobody's conditions.
I tell you always, Josephine, that these are the foolish phrases of
mediocre people who wish to fetter the great.  They do not apply to me.
I will never consent to frame my conduct by the puerile arrangements of
society.'

'Have you no feeling then?' sobbed the Empress.

'A great man is not made for feeling.  It is for him to decide what he
shall do, and then to do it without interference from anyone.  It is
your place, Josephine, to submit to all my fancies, and you should think
it quite natural that I should allow myself some latitude.'

It was a favourite device of the Emperor's, when he was in the wrong
upon one point, to turn the conversation round so as to get upon some
other one on which he was in the right.  Having worked off the first
explosion of his passion he now assumed the offensive, for in argument,
as in war, his instinct was always to attack.

'I have been looking over Lenormand's accounts, Josephine,' said he.
'Are you aware how many dresses you have had last year? You have had a
hundred and forty--no less--and many of them cost as much as twenty-five
thousand livres.  I am told that you have six hundred dresses in your
wardrobes, many of which have hardly ever been used.  Madame de Remusat
knows that what I say is true.  She cannot deny it.'

'You like me to dress well, Napoleon.'

'I will not have such monstrous extravagance.  I could have two
regiments of cuirassiers, or a fleet of frigates, with the money which
you squander upon foolish silks and furs.  It might turn the fortunes of
a campaign.  Then again, Josephine, who gave you permission to order
that parure of diamonds and sapphires from Lefebvre?  The bill has been
sent to me and I have refused to pay for it.  If he applies again, I
shall have him marched to prison between a file of grenadiers, and your
milliner shall accompany him there.'

The Emperor's fits of anger, although tempestuous, were never very
prolonged.  The curious convulsive wriggle of one of his arms, which
always showed when he was excited, gradually died away, and after
looking for some time at the papers of de Meneval--who had written away
like an automaton during all this uproar--he came across to the fire
with a smile upon his lips, and a brow from which the shadow had
departed.

'You have no excuse for extravagance, Josephine,' said he, laying his
hand upon her shoulder.  'Diamonds and fine dresses are very necessary
to an ugly woman in order to make her attractive, but _you_ cannot need
them for such a purpose.  You had no fine dresses when first I saw you
in the Rue Chautereine, and yet there was no woman in the world who ever
attracted me so.  Why will you vex me, Josephine, and make me say things
which seem unkind?  Drive back, little one, to Pont de Briques, and see
that you do not catch cold.'

'You will come to the salon, Napoleon?' asked the Empress, whose
bitterest resentment seemed to vanish in an instant at the first kindly
touch from his hand.  She still held her handkerchief before her eyes,
but it was chiefly, I think, to conceal the effect which her tears had
had upon her cheeks.

'Yes, yes, I will come.  Our carriages will follow yours.  See the
ladies into the berline, Constant.  Have you ordered the embarkation of
the troops, Berthier? Come here, Talleyrand, for I wish to describe my
views about the future of Spain and Portugal.  Monsieur de Laval, you
may escort the Empress to Pont de Briques, where I shall see you at the
reception.'



CHAPTER XV


THE RECEPTION OF THE EMPRESS

Pont de Briques is but a small village, and this sudden arrival of the
Court, which was to remain for some weeks, had crammed it with visitors.
It would have been very much simpler to have come to Boulogne, where
there were more suitable buildings and better accommodation, but
Napoleon had named Pont de Briques, so Pont de Briques it had to be.
The word impossible was not permitted amongst those who had to carry out
his wishes.  So an army of cooks and footmen settled upon the little
place, and then there arrived the dignitaries of the new Empire, and
then the ladies of the Court, and then their admirers from the camp.
The Empress had a chateau for her accommodation.  The rest quartered
themselves in cottages or where they best might, and waited ardently for
the moment which was to take them back to the comforts of Versailles or
Fontainebleau.

The Empress had graciously offered me a seat in her berline, and all the
way to the village, entirely forgetful apparently of the scene through
which she passed, she chatted away, asking me a thousand personal
questions about myself and my affairs, for a kindly curiosity in the
doings of everyone around her was one of her most marked
characteristics.  Especially was she interested in Eugenie, and as the
subject was one upon which I was equally interested in talking it ended
in a rhapsody upon my part, amid little sympathetic ejaculations from
the Empress and titterings from Madame de Remusat.

'But you must certainly bring her over to the Court!' cried the kindly
woman.  'Such a paragon of beauty and of virtue must not be allowed to
waste herself in this English village.  Have you spoken about her to the
Emperor?'

'I found that he knew all about her, your Majesty.'

'He knows all about everything.  Oh, what a man he is!  You heard him
about those diamonds and sapphires.  Lefebvre gave me his word that no
one should know of it but ourselves, and that I should pay at my
leisure, and yet you see that the Emperor knew.  But what did he say,
Monsieur de Laval?'

'He said that my marriage should be his affair.'

Josephine shook her head and groaned.

'But this is serious, Monsieur de Laval.  He is capable of singling out
any one of the ladies of the Court and marrying you to her within a
week.  It is a subject upon which he will not listen to argument.  He
has brought about some extraordinary matches in this way.  But I will
speak to the Emperor before I return to Paris, and I will see what I can
arrange for you.'

I was still endeavouring to thank her for her sympathy and kindness when
the berline rattled up the drive and pulled up at the entrance to the
chateau, where the knot of scarlet footmen and the bearskins of two
sentries from the Guards announced the Imperial quarters.  The Empress
and her lady hurried away to prepare their toilets for the evening, and
I was shown at once into the salon, in which the guests had already
begun to assemble.

This was a large square room furnished as modestly as the sitting-room
of a provincial gentleman would be likely to be.  The wall-paper was
gloomy, and the furniture was of dark mahogany upholstered in faded blue
nankeen, but there were numerous candles in candelabra upon the tables
and in sconces upon the walls which gave an air of festivity even to
these sombre surroundings.  Out of the large central room were several
smaller ones in which card-tables had been laid out, and the doorways
between had been draped with Oriental chintz.  A number of ladies and
gentlemen were standing about, the former in the high evening dresses to
which the Emperor had given his sanction, the latter about equally
divided between the civilians in black court costumes and the soldiers
in their uniforms.  Bright colours and graceful draperies predominated,
for in spite of his lectures about economy the Emperor was very harsh to
any lady who did not dress in a manner which would sustain the
brilliancy of his Court.  The prevailing fashions gave an opening to
taste and to display, for the simple classical costumes had died out
with the Republic, and Oriental dresses had taken their place as a
compliment to the Conqueror of Egypt.  Lucretia had changed to Zuleika,
and the salons which had reflected the austerity of old Rome had turned
suddenly into so many Eastern harems.

On entering the room I had retired into a corner, fearing that I should
find none there whom I knew; but someone plucked at my arm, and turning
round I found myself looking into the yellow inscrutable face of my
uncle Bernac.  He seized my unresponsive hand and wrung it with a false
cordiality.

'My dear Louis,' said he.  'It was really the hope of meeting you here
which brought me over from Grosbois--although you can understand that
living so far from Paris I cannot afford to miss such an opportunity of
showing myself at Court.  Nevertheless I can assure you that it was of
you principally that I was thinking.  I hear that you have had a
splendid reception from the Emperor, and that you have been taken into
his personal service.  I had spoken to him about you, and I made him
fully realise that if he treats you well he is likely to coax some of
the other young emigres into his service.'

I was convinced that he was lying, but none the less I had to bow and
utter a few words of cold thanks.

'I see that you still bear me some grudge for what passed between us the
other day,' said he, 'but really, my dear Louis, you have no occasion to
do so.  It was your own good which I had chiefly at heart.  I am neither
a young nor a strong man, Louis, and my profession, as you have seen, is
a dangerous one.  There is my child, and there is my estate.  Who takes
one, takes both.  Sibylle is a charming girl, and you must not allow
yourself to be prejudiced against her by any ill temper which she may
have shown towards me.  I will confess that she had some reason to be
annoyed at the turn which things had taken.  But I hope to hear that you
have now thought better upon this matter.'

'I have never thought about it at all, and I beg that you will not
discuss it,' said I curtly.

He stood in deep thought for a few moments, and then he raised his evil
face and his cruel grey eyes to mine.

'Well, well, that is settled then,' said he.  'But you cannot bear me a
grudge for having wished you to be my successor.  Be reasonable, Louis.
You must acknowledge that you would now be six feet deep in the
salt-marsh with your neck broken if I had not stood your friend, at some
risk to myself.  Is that not true?'

'You had your own motive for that,' said I.

'Very likely.  But none the less I saved you.  Why should you bear me
ill will?  It is no fault of mine if I hold your estate.'

'It is not on account of that.'

'Why is it then?'

I could have explained that it was because he had betrayed his comrades,
because his daughter hated him, because he had ill-used his wife,
because my father regarded him as the source of all his troubles--but
the salon of the Empress was no place for a family quarrel, so I merely
shrugged my shoulders, and was silent.

'Well, I am very sorry,' said he, 'for I had the best of intentions
towards you.   I could have advanced you, for there are few men in
France who exercise more influence.  But I have one request to make to
you.'

'What is that, sir?'

'I have a number of personal articles, belonging to your father--his
sword, his seals, a deskful of letters, some silver plate--such things
in short as you would wish to keep in memory of him.  I should be glad
if you will come to Grosbois--if it is only for one night--and look over
these things, choosing what you wish to take away.  My conscience will
then be clear about them.'

I promised readily that I would do so.

'And when would you come?' he asked eagerly.  Something in the tone of
his voice aroused my suspicions, and glancing at him I saw exultation in
his eyes.  I remembered the warning of Sibylle.

'I cannot come until I have learned what my duties with the Emperor are
to be.  When that is settled I shall come.'

'Very good.  Next week perhaps, or the week afterwards.  I shall expect
you eagerly, Louis.  I rely upon your promise, for a Laval was never
known to break one.'  With another unanswered squeeze of my hand, he
slipped off among the crowd, which was growing denser every instant in
the salon.

I was standing in silence thinking over this sinister invitation of my
uncle's, when I heard my own name, and, looking up, I saw de
Caulaincourt, with his brown handsome face and tall elegant figure,
making his way towards me.

'It is your first entrance at Court, is it not, Monsieur de Laval,' said
he, in his high-bred cordial manner; 'you should not feel lonely, for
there are certainly many friends of your father here who will be
overjoyed to make the acquaintance of your father's son.  From what de
Meneval told me I gather that you know hardly anyone--even by sight.'

'I know the Marshals,' said I; 'I saw them all at the council in the
Emperor's tent.  There is Ney with the red head.  And there is Lefebvre
with his singular mouth, and Bernadotte with the beak of a bird of
prey.'

'Precisely.  And that is Rapp, with the round, bullet head.  He is
talking to Junot, the handsome dark man with the whiskers.  These poor
soldiers are very unhappy.'

'Why so?' I asked.

'Because they are all men who have risen from nothing.  This society and
etiquette terrifies them much more than all the dangers of war.
When they can hear their sabres clashing against their big boots they
feel at home, but when they have to stand about with their cocked hats
under their arms, and have to pick their spurs out of the ladies'
trains, and talk about David's picture or Passaniello's opera, it
prostrates them.  The Emperor will not even permit them to swear,
although he has no scruples upon his own account.  He tells them to be
soldiers with the army, and courtiers with the Court, but the poor
fellows cannot help being soldiers all the time.   Look at Rapp with his
twenty wounds, endeavouring to exchange little delicate drolleries with
that young lady.  There, you see, he has said something which would have
passed very well with a vivandiere, but it has made her fly to her
mamma, and he is scratching his head, for he cannot imagine how he has
offended her.'

'Who is the beautiful woman with the white dress and the tiara of
diamonds?' I asked.

'That is Madame Murat, who is the sister of the Emperor.  Caroline is
beautiful, but she is not as pretty as her sister Marie, whom you see
over yonder in the corner.  Do you see the tall stately dark-eyed old
lady with whom she is talking?  That is Napoleon's mother--a wonderful
woman, the source of all their strength, shrewd, brave, vigorous,
forcing respect from everyone who knows her.  She is as careful and as
saving as when she was the wife of a small country gentleman in Corsica,
and it is no secret that she has little confidence in the permanence of
the present state of things, and that she is always laying by for an
evil day.  The Emperor does not know whether to be amused or exasperated
by her precautions.  Well, Murat, I suppose we shall see you riding
across the Kentish hop-fields before long.'

The famous soldier had paused opposite to us, and shook hands with my
companion.  His elegant well-knit figure, large fiery eyes, and noble
bearing made this innkeeper's boy a man who would have drawn attention
and admiration to himself in any assembly in Europe.  His mop of curly
hair and thick red lips gave that touch of character and individuality
to his appearance which redeem a handsome face from insipidity.

'I am told that it is devilish bad country for cavalry--all cut up into
hedges and ditches,' said he.  'The roads are good, but the fields are
impossible.  I hope that we are going soon, Monsieur de Caulaincourt,
for our men will all settle down as gardeners if this continues.
They are learning more about watering-pots and spuds than about horses
and sabres.'

'The army, I hear, is to embark to-morrow.'

'Yes, yes, but you know very well that they will disembark again upon
the wrong side of the Channel.  Unless Villeneuve scatters the English
fleet, nothing can be attempted.'

'Constant tells me that the Emperor was whistling "Malbrook" all the
time that he was dressing this morning, and that usually comes before a
move.'

'It was very clever of Constant to tell what tune it was which the
Emperor was whistling,' said Murat, laughing.  'For my part I do not
think that he knows the difference between the "Malbrook" and the
"Marseillaise."  Ah, here is the Empress--and how charming she is
looking!'

Josephine had entered, with several of her ladies in her train, and the
whole assembly rose to do her honour.  The Empress was dressed in an
evening gown of rose-coloured tulle, spangled with silver stars--an
effect which might have seemed meretricious and theatrical in another
woman, but which she carried off with great grace and dignity.  A little
sheaf of diamond wheat-ears rose above her head, and swayed gently as
she walked.  No one could entertain more charmingly than she, for she
moved about among the people with her amiable smile, setting everybody
at their ease by her kindly natural manner, and by the conviction which
she gave them that she was thoroughly at her ease herself.  'How amiable
she is!' I exclaimed.  'Who could help loving her?'

'There is only one family which can resist her,' said de Caulaincourt,
glancing round to see that Murat was out of hearing.  'Look at the faces
of the Emperor's sisters.'

I was shocked when I followed his direction to see the malignant glances
with which these two beautiful women were following the Empress as she
walked about the room.  They whispered together and tittered
maliciously.  Then Madame Murat turned to her mother behind her, and the
stern old lady tossed her haughty head in derision and contempt.

'They feel that Napoleon is theirs and that they ought to have
everything.  They cannot bear to think that she is Her Imperial Majesty
and they are only Her Highness.  They all hate her, Joseph, Lucien--all
of them.  When they had to carry her train at the coronation they tried
to trip her up, and the Emperor had to interfere.  Oh yes, they have the
real Corsican blood, and they are not very comfortable people to get
along with.'

But in spite of the evident hatred of her husband's family, the Empress
appeared to be entirely unconcerned and at her ease as she strolled
about among the groups of her guests with a kindly glance and a pleasant
word for each of them.  A tall, soldierly man, brown-faced and
moustached, walked beside her, and she occasionally laid her hand with a
caressing motion upon his arm.

'That is her son, Eugene de Beauharnais,' said my companion.

'Her son!' I exclaimed, for he seemed to me to be the older of the two.

De Caulaincourt smiled at my surprise.

'You know she married Beauharnais when she was very young--in fact she
was hardly sixteen.  She has been sitting in her boudoir while her son
has been baking in Egypt and Syria, so that they have pretty well
bridged over the gap between them.  Do you see the tall, handsome,
clean-shaven man who has just kissed Josephine's hand.  That is Talma
the famous actor.  He once helped Napoleon at a critical moment of his
career, and the Emperor has never forgotten the debt which the Consul
contracted.  That is really the secret of Talleyrand's power.  He lent
Napoleon a hundred thousand francs before he set out for Egypt, and now,
however much he distrusts him, the Emperor cannot forget that old
kindness.  I have never known him to abandon a friend or to forgive an
enemy.  If you have once served him well you may do what you like
afterwards.  There is one of his coachmen who is drunk from morning to
night.  But he gained the cross at Marengo, and so he is safe.'

De Caulaincourt had moved on to speak with some lady, and I was again
left to my own thoughts, which turned upon this extraordinary man, who
presented himself at one moment as a hero and at another as a spoiled
child, with his nobler and his worse side alternating so rapidly that I
had no sooner made up my mind about him than some new revelation would
destroy my views and drive me to some fresh conclusion.  That he was
necessary to France was evident, and that in serving him one was serving
one's country.  But was it an honour or a penance to serve him?  Was he
worthy merely of obedience, or might love and esteem be added to it?
These were the questions which we found it difficult to answer--and some
of us will never have answered them up to the end of time.

The company had now lost all appearance of formality, and even the
soldiers seemed to be at their ease.  Many had gone into the side rooms,
where they had formed tables for whist and for vingt-et-un.  For my own
part I was quite entertained by watching the people, the beautiful
women, the handsome men, the bearers of names which had been heard of in
no previous generation, but which now rung round the world.  Immediately
in front of me were Ney, Lannes, and Murat chatting together and
laughing with the freedom of the camp.  Of the three, two were destined
to be executed in cold blood, and the third to die upon the
battle-field, but no coming shadow ever cast a gloom upon their cheery,
full-blooded lives.

A small, silent, middle-aged man, who looked unhappy and ill at ease,
had been leaning against the wall beside me.  Seeing that he was as
great a stranger as myself, I addressed some observation to him, to
which he replied with great good-will, but in the most execrable French.

'You don't happen to understand English?' he asked.  'I've never met one
living soul in this country who did.'

'Oh yes, I understand it very well, for I have lived most of my life
over yonder.  But surely you are not English, sir?  I understood that
every Englishman in France was under lock and key ever since the breach
of the treaty of Amiens.'

'No, I am not English,' he answered, 'I am an American.  My name is
Robert Fulton, and I have to come to these receptions because it is the
only way in which I can keep myself in the memory of the Emperor, who is
examining some inventions of mine which will make great changes in naval
warfare.'

Having nothing else to do I asked this curious American what his
inventions might be, and his replies very soon convinced me that I had
to do with a madman.  He had some idea of making a ship go against the
wind and against the current by means of coal or wood which was to be
burned inside of her.  There was some other nonsense about floating
barrels full of gunpowder which would blow a ship to pieces if she
struck against them.  I listened to him at the time with an indulgent
smile, but now looking back from the point of vantage of my old age I
can see that not all the warriors and statesmen in that room--no, not
even the Emperor himself--have had as great an effect upon the history
of the world as that silent American who looked so drab and so
commonplace among the gold-slashed uniforms and the Oriental dresses.

But suddenly our conversation was interrupted by a hush in the room--
such a cold, uncomfortable hush as comes over a roomful of happy,
romping children when a grave-faced elder comes amongst them.
The chatting and the laughter died away.  The sound of the rustling
cards and of the clicking counters had ceased in the other rooms.
Everyone, men and women, had risen to their feet with a constrained
expectant expression upon their faces.  And there in the doorway were
the pale face and the green coat with the red cordon across the white
waistcoat.

There was no saying how he might behave upon these occasions.
Sometimes he was capable of being the merriest and most talkative of the
company, but this was rather in his consular than in his imperial days.
On the other hand he might be absolutely ferocious, with an insulting
observation for everyone with whom he came in contact.  As a rule he was
between these two extremes, silent, morose, ill at ease, shooting out
curt little remarks which made everyone uncomfortable.  There was always
a sigh of relief when he would pass from one room into the next.

On this occasion he seemed to have not wholly recovered from the storm
of the afternoon, and he looked about him with a brooding eye and a
lowering brow.  It chanced that I was not very far from the door, and
that his glance fell upon me.

'Come here, Monsieur de Laval,' said he.  He laid his hand upon my
shoulder and turned to a big, gaunt man who had accompanied him into the
room.  'Look here, Cambaceres, you simpleton,' said he.  'You always
said that the old families would never come back, and that they would
settle in England as the Huguenots have done.  You see that, as usual,
you have miscalculated, for here is the heir of the de Lavals come to
offer his services.  Monsieur de Laval, you are now my aide-de-camp, and
I beg you to keep with me wherever I go.'

This was promotion indeed, and yet I had sense enough to know that it
was not for my own sweet sake that the Emperor had done it, but in order
to encourage others to follow me.  My conscience approved what I had
done, for no sordid motive and nothing but the love of my country had
prompted me; but now, as I walked round behind Napoleon, I felt
humiliated and ashamed, like a prisoner led behind the car of his
captor.

And soon there was something else to make me ashamed, and that was the
conduct of him whose servant I had become.  His manners were outrageous.
As he had himself said, it was his nature to be always first, and this
being so he resented those courtesies and gallantries by which men are
accustomed to disguise from women the fact that they are the weaker sex.
The Emperor, unlike Louis XIV., felt that even a temporary and
conventional attitude of humility towards a woman was too great a
condescension from his own absolute supremacy.  Chivalry was among those
conditions of society which he refused to accept.

To the soldiers he was amiable enough, with a nod and a joke for each of
them.  To his sisters also he said a few words, though rather in the
tone of a drill sergeant to a pair of recruits.  It was only when the
Empress had joined him that his ill-humour came to a head.

'I wish you would not wear those wisps of pink about your head,
Josephine,' said he, pettishly.  'All that women have to think about is
how to dress themselves, and yet they cannot even do that with
moderation or taste.  If I see you again in such a thing I will thrust
it in the fire as I did your shawl the other day.'

'You are so hard to please, Napoleon.  You like one day what you cannot
abide the next.  But I will certainly change it if it offends you,' said
Josephine, with admirable patience.

The Emperor took a few steps between the people, who had formed a lane
for us to pass through.  Then he stopped and looked over his shoulder at
the Empress.

'How often have I told you, Josephine, that I cannot tolerate fat
women.'

'I always bear it in mind, Napoleon.'

'Then why is Madame de Chevreux present?'

'But surely, Napoleon, madame is not very fat.'

'She is fatter than she should be.  I should prefer not to see her.
Who is this?'  He had paused before a young lady in a blue dress, whose
knees seemed to be giving way under her as the terrible Emperor
transfixed her with his searching eyes.

'This is Mademoiselle de Bergerot.'

'How old are you?'

'Twenty-three, sire.'

'It is time that you were married.  Every woman should be married at
twenty-three.  How is it that you are not married?'

The poor girl appeared to be incapable of answering, so the Empress
gently remarked that it was to the young men that that question should
be addressed.

'Oh, that is the difficulty, is it?' said the Emperor.  'We must look
about and find a husband for you.'  He turned, and to my horror I found
his eyes fixed with a questioning gaze upon my face.

'We have to find you a wife also, Monsieur de Laval,' said he.  'Well,
well, we shall see--we shall see.  What is your name?' to a quiet
refined man in black.

'I am Gretry, the musician.'

'Yes, yes, I remember you.  I have seen you a hundred times, but I can
never recall your name.  Who are you?'

'I am Joseph de Chenier.'

'Of course.  I have seen your tragedy.  I have forgotten the name of it,
but it was not good.  You have written some other poetry, have you not?'

'Yes, sire.  I had your permission to dedicate my last volume to you.'

'Very likely, but I have not had time to read it.  It is a pity that we
have no poets now in France, for the deeds of the last few years would
have given a subject for a Homer or a Virgil.  It seems that I can
create kingdoms but not poets.  Whom do you consider to be the greatest
French writer?'

'Racine, sire.'

'Then you are a blockhead, for Corneille was infinitely greater.  I have
no ear for metre or trivialities of the kind, but I can sympathise with
the spirit of poetry, and I am conscious that Corneille is far the
greatest of poets.  I would have made him my prime minister had he had
the good fortune to live in my epoch.  It is his intellect which I
admire, his knowledge of the human heart, and his profound feeling.
Are you writing anything at present?'

'I am writing a tragedy upon Henry IV., sire.'

'It will not do, sir.  It is too near the present day, and I will not
have politics upon the stage.  Write a play about Alexander.  What is
your name?'

He had pitched upon the same person whom he had already addressed.

'I am still Gretry, the musician,' said he meekly.

The Emperor flushed for an instant at the implied rebuke.  He said
nothing, however, but passed on to where several ladies were standing
together near the door of the card-room.

'Well, madame,' said he to the nearest of them, 'I hope you are behaving
rather better.  When last I heard from Paris your doings were furnishing
the Quartier St. Germain with a good deal of amusement and gossip.'

'I beg that your Majesty will explain what you mean,' said she with
spirit.

'They had coupled your name with that of Colonel Lasalle.'

'It is a foul calumny, sire.'

'Very possibly, but it is awkward when so many calumnies cluster round
one person.  You are certainly a most unfortunate lady in that respect.
You had a scandal once before with General Rapp's aide-de-camp.  This
must come to an end.  What is your name?' he continued, turning to
another.

'Mademoiselle de Perigord.'

'Your age?'

'Twenty.'

'You are very thin and your elbows are red.  My God, Madame Boismaison,
are we never to see anything but this same grey gown and the red turban
with the diamond crescent?'

'I have never worn it before, sire?'

'Then you had another the same, for I am weary of the sight of it.
Let me never see you in it again.  Monsieur de Remusat, I make you a
good allowance.  Why do you not spend it?'

'I do, sire.'

'I hear that you have been putting down your carriage.  I do not give
you money to hoard in a bank, but I give it to you that you may keep up
a fitting appearance with it.  Let me hear that your carriage is back in
the coach-house when I return to Paris.  Junot, you rascal, I hear that
you have been gambling and losing.'

'The most infernal run of luck, sire,' said the soldier, 'I give you my
word that the ace fell four times running.'

'Ta, ta, you are a child, with no sense of the value of money.  How much
do you owe?'

'Forty thousand, sire.'

'Well, well, go to Lebrun and see what he can do for you.  After all, we
were together at Toulon.'

'A thousand thanks, sire.'

'Tut!  You and Rapp and Lasalle are the spoiled children of the army.
But no more cards, you rascal!  I do not like low dresses, Madame
Picard.  They spoil even pretty women, but in you they are inexcusable.
Now, Josephine, I am going to my room, and you can come in half an hour
and read me to sleep.  I am tired to-night, but I came to your salon,
since you desired that I should help you in welcoming and entertaining
your guests.  You can remain here, Monsieur de Laval, for your presence
will not be necessary until I send you my orders.'

And so the door closed behind him, and with a long sigh of relief from
everyone, from the Empress to the waiter with the negus, the friendly
chatter began once more, with the click of the counters and the rustle
of the cards just as they had been before he came to help in the
entertainment.



CHAPTER XVI


THE LIBRARY OF GROSBOIS

And now, my friends, I am coming to the end of those singular adventures
which I encountered upon my arrival in France, adventures which might
have been of some interest in themselves had I not introduced the figure
of the Emperor, who has eclipsed them all as completely as the sun
eclipses the stars.  Even now, you see, after all these years, in an old
man's memoirs, the Emperor is still true to his traditions, and will not
brook any opposition.  As I draw his words and his deeds I feel that my
own poor story withers before them.  And yet if it had not been for that
story I should not have had an excuse for describing to you my first and
most vivid impressions of him, and so it has served a purpose after all.
You must bear with me now while I tell you of our expedition to the Red
Mill and of what befell in the library of Grosbois.

Two days had passed away since the reception of the Empress Josephine,
and only one remained of the time which had been allowed to my cousin
Sibylle in which she might save her lover, and capture the terrible
Toussac.  For my own part I was not so very anxious that she should save
this craven lover of hers, whose handsome face belied the poor spirit
within him.  And yet this lonely beautiful woman, with the strong will
and the loyal heart, had touched my feelings, and I felt that I would
help her to anything--even against my own better judgment, if she should
desire it.  It was then with a mixture of feelings that late in the
afternoon I saw her and General Savary enter the little room in which I
lodged at Boulogne.  One glance at her flushed cheeks and triumphant
eyes told me that she was confident in her own success.

'I told you that I would find him, Cousin Louis!' she cried; 'I have
come straight to you, because you said that you would help in the taking
of him.'

'Mademoiselle insists upon it that I should not use soldiers,' said
Savary, shrugging his shoulders.

'No, no, no,' she cried with vehemence.  'It has to be done with
discretion, and at the sight of a soldier he would fly to some
hiding-place, where you would never be able to follow him.  I cannot
afford to run a risk.  There is too much already at stake.'

'In such an affair three men are as useful as thirty,' said Savary.
'I should not in any case have employed more.  You say that you have
another friend, Lieutenant--?'

'Lieutenant Gerard of the Hussars of Bercheny.'

'Quite so.  There is not a more gallant officer in the Grand Army than
Etienne Gerard.  The three of us, Monsieur de Laval, should be equal to
any adventure.'

'I am at your disposal.'

'Tell us then, mademoiselle, where Toussac is hiding.'

'He is hiding at the Red Mill.'

'But we have searched it, I assure you that he is not there.'

'When did you search it?'

'Two days ago.'

'Then he has come there since.  I knew that Jeanne Portal loved him.
I have watched her for six days.  Last night she stole down to the Red
Mill with a basket of wine and fruit.  All the morning I have seen her
eyes sweeping the country side, and I have read the terror in them
whenever she has seen the twinkle of a bayonet.  I am as sure that
Toussac is in the mill as if I had seen him with my own eyes.'

'In that case there is not an instant to be lost,' cried Savary.  'If he
knows of a boat upon the coast he is as likely as not to slip away after
dark and make his escape for England.  From the Red Mill one can see all
the surrounding country, and Mademoiselle is right in thinking that a
large body of soldiers would only warn him to escape.'

'What do you propose then?' I asked.

'That you meet us at the south gate of the camp in an hour's time
dressed as you are.  You might be any gentleman travelling upon the high
road.  I shall see Gerard, and we shall adopt some suitable disguise.
Bring your pistols, for it is with the most desperate man in France we
have to do.  We shall have a horse at your disposal.'

The setting sun lay dull and red upon the western horizon, and the white
chalk cliffs of the French coast had all flushed into pink when I found
myself once more at the gate of the Boulogne Camp.  There was no sign of
my companions, but a tall man, dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons
like a small country farmer, was tightening the girth of a magnificent
black horse, whilst a little further on a slim young ostler was waiting
by the roadside, holding the bridles of two others.  It was only when I
recognised one of the pair as the horse which I had ridden on my first
coming to camp that I answered the smile upon the keen handsome face of
the ostler, and saw the swarthy features of Savary under the
broad-brimmed hat of the farmer.

'I think that we may travel without fearing to excite suspicion,' said
he.  'Crook that straight back of yours a little, Gerard!  And now we
shall push upon our way, or we may find that we are too late.'

My life has had its share of adventures, and yet, somehow, this ride
stands out above the others.

There over the waters I could dimly see the loom of the English coast,
with its suggestions of dreamy villages, humming bees, and the pealing
of Sunday bells.  I thought of the long, white High Street of Ashford,
with its red brick houses, and the inn with the great swinging sign.
All my life had been spent in these peaceful surroundings, and now, here
I was with a spirited horse between my knees, two pistols peeping out of
my holsters, and a commission upon which my whole future might depend,
to arrest the most redoubtable conspirator in France.  No wonder that,
looking back over many dangers and many vicissitudes, it is still that
evening ride over the short crisp turf of the downs which stands out
most clearly in my memory.  One becomes _blase_ to adventure, as one
becomes _blase_ to all else which the world can give, save only the
simple joys of home, and to taste the full relish of such an
expedition one must approach it with the hot blood of youth still
throbbing in one's veins.

Our route, when we had left the uplands of Boulogne behind us, lay along
the skirts of that desolate marsh in which I had wandered, and so
inland, through plains of fern and bramble, until the familiar black
keep of the Castle of Grosbois rose upon the left.  Then, under the
guidance of Savary, we struck to the right down a sunken road, and so
over the shoulder of a hill until, on a further slope beyond, we saw the
old windmill black against the evening sky.  Its upper window burned red
like a spot of blood in the last rays of the setting sun.  Close by the
door stood a cart full of grain sacks, with the shafts pointing
downwards and the horse grazing at some distance.  As we gazed, a woman
appeared upon the downs and stared round, with her hand over her eyes.

'See that!' said Savary eagerly.  'He is there sure enough, or why
should they be on their guard?  Let us take this road which winds round
the hill, and they will not see us until we are at the very door.'

'Should we not gallop forward?' I suggested.

'The ground is too cut up.  The longer way is the safer.  As long as we
are upon the road they cannot tell us from any other travellers.'

We walked our horses along the path, therefore, with as unconcerned an
air as we could assume;  but a sharp exclamation made us glance suddenly
round, and there was the woman standing on a hillock by the roadside and
gazing down at us with a face that was rigid with suspicion.  The sight
of the military bearing of my companions changed all her fear into
certainties.  In an instant she had whipped the shawl from her
shoulders, and was waving it frantically over her head.  With a hearty
curse Savary spurred his horse up the bank and galloped straight for the
mill, with Gerard and myself at his heels.

It was only just in time.  We were still a hundred paces from the door
when a man sprang out from it, and gazed about him, his head whisking
this way and that.  There could be no mistaking the huge bristling
beard, the broad chest, and the rounded shoulders of Toussac.  A glance
showed him that we would ride him down before he could get away, and he
sprang back into the mill, closing the heavy door with a clang behind
him.

'The window, Gerard, the window!' cried  Savary.

There was a small, square window opening into the basement room of the
mill.  The young hussar disengaged himself from the saddle and flew
through it as the clown goes through the hoops at Franconi's.
An instant later he had opened the door for us, with the blood streaming
from his face and hands.

'He has fled up the stair,' said he.

'Then we need be in no hurry, since he cannot pass us,' said Savary, as
we sprang from our horses.  'You have carried his first line of
entrenchments most gallantly, Lieutenant Gerard.  I hope you are not
hurt?'

'A few scratches, General, nothing more.'

'Get your pistols, then.  Where is the miller?'

'Here I am,' said a squat, rough little fellow, appearing in the open
doorway.  'What do you mean, you brigands, by entering my mill in this
fashion?  I am sitting reading my paper and smoking my pipe of
coltsfoot, as my custom is about this time of the evening, and suddenly,
without a word, a man comes flying through my window, covers me with
glass, and opens my door to his friends outside.  I've had trouble
enough with my one lodger all day without three more of you turning up.'

'You have the conspirator Toussac in your house.'

'Toussac!' cried the miller.  'Nothing of the kind.  His name is
Maurice, and he is a merchant in silks.'

'He is the man we want.  We come in the Emperor's name.'

The miller's jaw dropped as he listened.

'I don't know who he is, but he offered a good price for a bed and I
asked no more questions.  In these days one cannot expect a certificate
of character from every lodger.  But, of course, if it is a matter of
State, why, it is not for me to interfere.  But, to do him justice, he
was a quiet gentleman enough until he had that letter just now.'

'What letter?  Be careful what you say, you rascal, for your own head
may find its way into the sawdust basket.'

'It was a woman who brought it.  I can only tell you what I know.
He has been talking like a madman ever since.  It made my blood run cold
to hear him.  There's someone whom he swears he will murder.  I shall be
very glad to see the last of him.'

'Now, gentlemen,' said Savary, drawing his sword, 'we may leave our
horses here.  There is no window for forty feet, so he cannot escape
from us.  If you will see that your pistols are primed, we shall soon
bring the fellow to terms.'

The stair was a narrow winding one made of wood, which led to a small
loft lighted from a slit in the wall.

Some remains of wood and a litter of straw showed that this was where
Toussac had spent his day.  There was, however, no sign of him now, and
it was evident that he had ascended the next flight of steps.
We climbed them, only to find our way barred by a heavy door.

'Surrender, Toussac!' cried Savary.  'It is useless to attempt to escape
us.

A hoarse laugh sounded from behind the door.

'I am not a man who surrenders.  But I will make a bargain with you.
I have a small matter of business to do to-night.  If you will leave me
alone, I will give you my solemn pledge to surrender at the camp
to-morrow.  I have a little debt that I wish to pay.  It is only to-day
that I understood to whom I owed it.'

'What you ask is impossible.'

'It would save you a great deal of trouble.'

'We cannot grant such a request.  You must surrender.'

'You'll have some work first.'

'Come, come, you cannot escape us.  Put your shoulders against the door!
Now, all together?'

There was the hot flash of a pistol from the keyhole, and a bullet
smacked against the wall between us.  We hurled ourselves against the
door.  It was massive, but rotten with age.  With a splintering and
rending it gave way before us.  We rushed in, weapons in hand, to find
ourselves in an empty room.

'Where the devil has he got to?' cried Savary, glaring round him.
'This is the top room of all.  There is nothing above it.'

It was a square empty space with a few corn-bags littered about.  At the
further side was an open window, and beside it lay a pistol, still
smoking from the discharge.  We all rushed across, and, as we craned our
heads over, a simultaneous cry of astonishment escaped from us.

The distance to the ground was so great that no one could have survived
the fall, but Toussac had taken advantage of the presence of that cart
full of grain-sacks, which I have described as having lain close to the
mill.  This had both shortened the distance and given him an excellent
means of breaking the fall.  Even so, however, the shock had been
tremendous, and as we looked out he was lying panting heavily upon the
top of the bags.  Hearing our cry, however, he looked up, shook his fist
defiantly, and, rolling from the cart, he sprang on to the back of
Savary's black horse, and galloped off across the downs, his great beard
flying in the wind, untouched by the pistol bullets with which we tried
to bring him down.

How we flew down those creaking wooden stairs and out through the open
door of the mill!  Quick as we were, he had a good start, and by the
time Gerard and I were in the saddle he had become a tiny man upon a
small horse galloping up the green slope of the opposite hill.
The shades of evening, too, were drawing in, and upon his left was the
huge salt-marsh, where we should have found it difficult to follow him.
The chances were certainly in his favour.  And yet he never swerved from
his course, but kept straight on across the downs on a line which took
him farther and farther from the sea.  Every instant we feared to see
him dart away in the morass, but still he held his horse's head against
the hill-side.  What could he be making for?  He never pulled rein and
never glanced round, but flew onwards, like a man with a definite goal
in view.

Lieutenant Gerard and I were lighter men, and our mounts were as good as
his, so that it was not long before we began to gain upon him.  If we
could only keep him in sight it was certain that we should ride him
down; but there was always the danger that he might use his knowledge of
the country to throw us off his track.  As we sank beneath each hill my
heart sank also, to rise again with renewed hope as we caught sight of
him once more galloping in front of us.

But at last that which I had feared befell us.  We were not more than a
couple of hundred paces behind him when we lost all trace of him.
He had vanished behind some rolling ground, and we could see nothing of
him when we reached the summit.

'There is a road there to the left,' cried Gerard, whose Gascon blood
was aflame with excitement.

'On, my friend, on, let us keep to the left!'

'Wait a moment!' I cried.  'There is a bridle-path upon the right, and
it is as likely that he took that.'

'Then do you take one and I the other.'

'One moment, I hear the sound of hoofs!'

'Yes, yes, it is his horse!'

A great black horse, which was certainly that of General Savary, had
broken out suddenly through a dense tangle of brambles in front of us.
The saddle was empty.

'He has found some hiding-place here amongst the brambles,' I cried.

Gerard had already sprung from his horse, and was leading him through
the bushes.  I followed his example, and in a minute or two we made our
way down a winding path into a deep chalk quarry.

'There is no sign of him!' cried Gerard.  'He has escaped us.'

But suddenly I had understood it all.  His furious rage which the miller
had described to us was caused no doubt by his learning how he came to
be betrayed upon the night of his arrival.  This sweetheart of his had
in some way discovered it, and had let him know.  His promise to deliver
himself up to-morrow was in order to give him time to have his revenge
upon my uncle.  And now with one idea in his head he had ridden to this
chalk quarry.   Of course, it must be the same chalk quarry into which
the underground passage of Grosbois opened, and no doubt during his
treasonable meetings with my uncle he had learned the secret.  Twice I
hit upon the wrong spot, but at the third trial I gained the face of the
cliff, made my way between it and the bushes, and found the narrow
opening, which was hardly visible in the gathering darkness.  During our
search Savary had overtaken us on foot, so now, leaving our horses in
the chalk-pit, my two companions followed me through the narrow entrance
tunnel, and on into the larger and older passage beyond.  We had no
lights, and it was as black as pitch within, so I stumbled forward as
best I might, feeling my way by keeping one hand upon the side wall, and
tripping occasionally over the stones which were scattered along the
path.  It had seemed no very great distance when my uncle had led the
way with the light, but now, what with the darkness, and what with the
uncertainty and the tension of our feelings, it appeared to be a long
journey, and Savary's deep voice at my elbow growled out questions as to
how many more miles we were to travel in this moleheap.

'Hush!' whispered Gerard.  'I hear someone in front of us.'

We stood listening in breathless silence.  Then far away through the
darkness I heard the sound of a door creaking upon its hinges.

'On, on!' cried Savary, eagerly.  'The rascal is there, sure enough.
This time at least we have got him!'

But for my part I had my fears.  I remembered that my uncle had opened
the door which led into the castle by some secret catch.  This sound
which we had heard seemed to show that Toussac had also known how to
open it.  But suppose that he had closed it behind him.  I remembered
its size and the iron clampings which bound it together.  It was
possible that even at the last moment we might find ourselves face to
face with an insuperable obstacle.  On and on we hurried in the dark,
and then suddenly I could have raised a shout of joy, for there in the
distance was a yellow glimmer of light, only visible in contrast with
the black darkness which lay between.  The door was open.  In his mad
thirst for vengeance Toussac had never given a thought to the pursuers
at his heels.

And now we need no longer grope.  It was a race along the passage and up
the winding stair, through the second door, and into the stone-flagged
corridor of the Castle of Grosbois, with the oil-lamp still burning at
the end of it.  A frightful cry--a long-drawn scream of terror and of
pain--rang through it as we entered.

'He is killing him!  He is killing him!' cried a voice, and a woman
servant rushed madly out into the passage.  'Help, help; he is killing
Monsieur Bernac!'

'Where is he?' shouted Savary.

'There! The library!  The door with the green curtain!'  Again that
horrible cry rang out, dying down to a harsh croaking.  It ended in a
loud, sharp snick, as when one cracks one's joint, but many times
louder.  I knew only too well what that dreadful sound portended.
We rushed together into the room, but the hardened Savary and the
dare-devil hussar both recoiled in horror from the sight which met our
gaze.

My uncle had been seated writing at his desk, with his back to the door,
when his murderer had entered.  No doubt it was at the first glance over
his shoulder that he had raised the scream when he saw that terrible
hairy face coming in upon him, while the second cry may have been when
those great hands clutched at his head.  He had never risen from his
chair--perhaps he had been too paralysed by fear--and he still sat with
his back to the door.  But what struck the colour from our cheeks was
that his head had been turned completely round, so that his horribly
distorted purple face looked squarely at us from between his shoulders.
Often in my dreams that thin face, with the bulging grey eyes, and the
shockingly open mouth, comes to disturb me.  Beside him stood Toussac,
his face flushed with triumph, and his great arms folded across his
chest.

'Well, my friends,' said he, 'you are too late, you see.  I have paid my
debts after all.'

'Surrender!' cried Savary.

'Shoot away! Shoot away!' he cried, drumming his hands upon his breast.
'You don't suppose I fear your miserable pellets, do you?  Oh, you
imagine you will take me alive!  I'll soon knock that idea out of your
heads.'

In an instant he had swung a heavy chair over his head, and was rushing
furiously at us.  We all fired our pistols into him together, but
nothing could stop that thunderbolt of a man.  With the blood spurting
from his wounds, he lashed madly out with his chair, but his eyesight
happily failed him, and his swashing blow came down upon the corner of
the table with a crash which broke it into fragments.  Then with a mad
bellow of rage he sprang upon Savary, tore him down to the ground, and
had his hand upon his chin before Gerard and I could seize him by the
arms.  We were three strong men, but he was as strong as all of us put
together, for again and again he shook himself free, and again and again
we got our grip upon him once more.  But he was losing blood fast.
Every instant his huge strength ebbed away.  With a supreme effort he
staggered to his feet, the three of us hanging on to him like hounds on
to a bear.  Then, with a shout of rage and despair which thundered
through the whole castle, his knees gave way under him, and he fell in a
huge inert heap upon the floor, his black beard bristling up towards the
ceiling.  We all stood panting round, ready to spring upon him if he
should move; but it was over.  He was dead.

Savary, deadly pale, was leaning with his hand to his side against the
table.  It was not for nothing that those mighty arms had been thrown
round him.

'I feel as if I had been hugged by a bear,' said he.  'Well, there is
one dangerous man the less in France, and the Emperor has lost one of
his enemies.  And yet he was a brave man too!'

'What a soldier he would have made!' said Gerard thoughtfully.  'What a
quartermaster for the Hussars of Bercheny!  He must have been a very
foolish person to set his will against that of the Emperor.'

I had seated myself, sick and dazed, upon the settee, for scenes of
bloodshed were new to me then, and this one had been enough to shock the
most hardened.  Savary gave us all a little cognac from his flask, and
then tearing down one of the curtains he laid it over the terrible
figure of my Uncle Bernac.

'We can do nothing here,' said he.  'I must get back and report to the
Emperor as soon as possible.  But all these papers of Bernac's must be
seized, for many of them bear upon this and other conspiracies.'  As he
spoke he gathered together a number of documents which were scattered
about the table--among the others a letter which lay before him upon the
desk, and which he had apparently just finished at the time of Toussac's
irruption.

'Hullo, what's this?' said Savary, glancing over it.  'I fancy that our
friend Bernac was a dangerous man also.  "My dear Catulle--I beg of you
to send me by the very first mail another phial of the same tasteless
essence which you sent three years ago.  I mean the almond decoction
which leaves no traces.  I have particular reasons for wanting it in the
course of next week, so I implore you not to delay.  You may rely upon
my interest with the Emperor whenever you have occasion to demand it."'

'Addressed to a chemist in Amiens,' said Savary, turning over the
letter.  'A poisoner then, on the top of his other virtues.  I wonder
for whom this essence of almonds which leaves no trace was intended.'

'I wonder,' said I.

After all, he was my uncle, and he was dead, so why should I say
further?



CHAPTER XVII


THE END

General Savary rode straight to Pont de Briques to report to the
Emperor, while Gerard returned with me to my lodgings to share a bottle
of wine.  I had expected to find my Cousin Sibylle there, but to my
surprise there was no sign of her, nor had she left any word to tell us
whither she had gone.

It was just after daybreak in the morning when I woke to find an equerry
of the Emperor with his hand upon my shoulder.

'The Emperor desires to see you, Monsieur de Laval,' said he.

'Where?'

'At the Pont de Briques.'

I knew that promptitude was the first requisite for those who hoped to
advance themselves in his service.  In ten minutes I was in the saddle,
and in half an hour I was at the chateau.  I was conducted upstairs to a
room in which were the Emperor and Josephine, she reclining upon a sofa
in a charming dressing-gown of pink and lace, he striding about in his
energetic fashion, dressed in the curious costume which he assumed
before his official hours had begun--a white sleeping suit, red Turkish
slippers, and a white bandanna handkerchief tied round his head, the
whole giving him the appearance of a West Indian planter.  From the
strong smell of eau-de-Cologne I judged that he had just come from his
bath.  He was in the best of humours, and she, as usual, reflected him,
so that they were two smiling faces which were turned upon me as I was
announced.  It was hard to believe that it was this man with the kindly
expression and the genial eye who had come like an east wind into the
reception-room the other night, and left a trail of wet cheeks and
downcast faces wherever he had passed.

'You have made an excellent debut as aide-de-camp,' said he; 'Savary
has told me all that has occurred, and nothing could have been better
arranged.  I have not time to think of such things myself, but my wife
will sleep more soundly now that she knows that this Toussac is out of
the way.'

'Yes, yes, he was a terrible man,' cried the Empress.  'So was that
Georges Cadoudal.  They were both terrible men.'

'I have my star, Josephine,' said Napoleon, patting her upon the head.
'I see my own career lying before me and I know exactly what I am
destined to do.  Nothing can harm me until my work is accomplished.
The Arabs are believers in Fate, and the Arabs are in the right.'

'Then why should you plan, Napoleon, if everything is to be decided by
Fate?'

'Because it is fated that I should plan, you little stupid.  Don't you
see that that is part of Fate also, that I should have a brain which is
capable of planning.  I am always building behind a scaffolding, and no
one can see what I am building until I have finished.  I never look
forward for less than two years, and I have been busy all morning,
Monsieur de Laval, in planning out the events which will occur in the
autumn and winter of 1807.  By the way, that good-looking cousin of
yours appears to have managed this affair very cleverly.  She is a very
fine girl to be wasted upon such a creature as the Lucien Lesage who has
been screaming for mercy for a week past.  Do you not think that it is a
great pity?'

I acknowledged that I did.

'It is always so with women--ideologists, dreamers, carried away by
whims and imaginings.  They are like the Easterns, who cannot conceive
that a man is a fine soldier unless he has a formidable presence.
I could not get the Egyptians to believe that I was a greater general
than Kleber, because he had the body of a porter and the head of a
hair-dresser.  So it is with this poor creature Lesage, who will be made
a hero by women because he has an oval face and the eyes of a calf.
Do you imagine that if she were to see him in his true colours it would
turn her against him?'

'I am convinced of it, sire.  From the little that I have seen of my
cousin I am sure that no one could have a greater contempt for cowardice
or for meanness.'

'You speak warmly, sir.  You are not by chance just a little touched
yourself by this fair cousin of yours?'

'Sire, I have already told you--'

'Ta, ta, ta, but she is across the water, and many things have happened
since then.'

Constant had entered the room.

'He has been admitted, sire.'

'Very good.  We shall move into the next room.  Josephine, you shall
come too, for it is your business rather than mine.'

The room into which we passed was a long, narrow one.  There were two
windows at one side, but the curtains had been drawn almost across, so
that the light was not very good.  At the further door was Roustem the
Mameluke, and beside him, with arms folded and his face sunk downwards
in an attitude of shame and contrition, there was standing the very man
of whom we had been talking.  He looked up with scared eyes, and started
with fear when he saw the Emperor approaching him.  Napoleon stood with
legs apart and his hands behind his back, and looked at him long and
searchingly.

'Well, my fine fellow,' said he at last, 'you have burned your fingers,
and I do not fancy that you will come near the fire again.  Or do you
perhaps think of continuing with politics as a profession?'

'If your Majesty will overlook what I have done,' Lesage stammered, 'I
shall faithfully promise you that I will be your most loyal servant
until the day of my death.'

'Hum!' said the Emperor, spilling a pinch of snuff over the front of his
white jacket.  'There is some sense in what you say, for no one makes so
good a servant as the man who has had a thorough fright.  But I am a
very exacting master.'

'I do not care what you require of me.  Everything will be welcome, if
you will only give me your forgiveness.'

'For example,' said the Emperor.  'It is one of my whims that when a man
enters my service I shall marry him to whom I like.  Do you agree to
that?'

There was a struggle upon the poet's face, and he clasped and unclasped
his hands.

'May I ask, sire--?'

'You may ask nothing.'

'But there are circumstances, sire--'

'There, there, that is enough!' cried the Emperor harshly, turning upon
his heel.  'I do not argue, I order.  There is a young lady, Mademoiselle
de Bergerot, for whom I desire a husband.  Will you marry her, or will you
return to prison?'

Again there was the struggle in the man's face, and he was silent,
twitching and writhing in his indecision.'

'It is enough!' cried the Emperor.  'Roustem, call the guard!'

'No, no, sire, do not send me back to prison.'

'The guard, Roustem!'

'I will do it, sire!  I will do it!  I will marry whomever you please!'

'You villain!' cried a voice, and there was Sibylle standing in the
opening of the curtains at one of the windows.  Her face was pale with
anger and her eyes shining with scorn; the parting curtains framed her
tall, slim figure, which leaned forwards in her fury of passion.
She had forgotten the Emperor, the Empress, everything, in her revulsion
of feeling against this craven whom she had loved.

'They told me what you were,' she cried.  'I would not believe them, I
_could_ not believe them--for I did not know that there was upon this
earth a thing so contemptible.  They said that they would prove it, and
I defied them to do so, and now I see you as you are.  Thank God that I
have found you out in time!  And to think that for your sake I have
brought about the death of a man who was worth a hundred of you!  Oh, I
am rightly punished for an unwomanly act.  Toussac has had his revenge.'

'Enough!' said the Emperor sternly.  'Constant, lead Mademoiselle Bernac
into the next room.  As to you, sir, I do not think that I can condemn
any lady of my Court to take such a man as a husband.  Suffice it that
you have been shown in your true colours, and that Mademoiselle Bernac
has been cured of a foolish infatuation.  Roustem, remove the prisoner!'

'There, Monsieur de Laval,' said the Emperor, when the wretched Lesage
had been conducted from the room.  'We have not done such a bad piece of
work between the coffee and the breakfast.  It was your idea, Josephine,
and I give you credit for it.  But now, de Laval, I feel that we owe you
some recompense for having set the young aristocrats a good example, and
for having had a share in this Toussac business.  You have certainly
acted very well.'

'I ask no recompense, sire,' said I, with an uneasy sense of what was
coming.

'It is your modesty that speaks.  But I have already decided upon your
reward.  You shall have such an allowance as will permit you to keep up
a proper appearance as my aide-de-camp, and I have determined to marry
you suitably to one of the ladies-in-waiting of the Empress.' My heart
turned to lead within me.

'But, sire,' I stammered, 'this is impossible.'

'Oh, you have no occasion to hesitate.  The lady is of excellent family
and she is not wanting in personal charm.  In a word, the affair is
settled, and the marriage takes place upon Thursday.'

'But it is impossible, sire,' I repeated.

'Impossible!  When you have been longer in my service, sir, you will
understand that that is a word which I do not tolerate.  I tell you that
it is settled.'

'My love is given to another, sire.  It is not possible for me to
change.'

'Indeed!' said the Emperor coldly.  'If you persist in such a resolution
you cannot expect to retain your place in my household.'

Here was the whole structure which my ambition had planned out crumbling
hopelessly about my ears.  And yet what was there for me to do?

'It is the bitterest moment of my life, sire,' said I, 'and yet I must
be true to the promise which I have given.  If I have to be a beggar by
the roadside, I shall none the less marry Eugenie de Choiseul or no
one.'

The Empress had risen and had approached the window.

'Well, at least, before you make up your mind, Monsieur de Laval,' said
she, 'I should certainly take a look at this lady-in-waiting of mine,
whom you refuse with such indignation.'

With a quick rasping of rings she drew back the curtain of the second
window.  A woman was standing in the recess.  She took a step forward
into the room, and then--and then with a cry and a spring my arms were
round her, and hers round me, and I was standing like a man in a dream,
looking down into the sweet laughing eyes of my Eugenie.  It was not
until I had kissed her and kissed her again upon her lips, her cheeks,
her hair, that I could persuade myself that she was indeed really there.

'Let us leave them,' said the voice of the Empress behind me.  'Come,
Napoleon.  It makes me sad!  It reminds me too much of the old days in
the Rue Chautereine.'

So there is an end of my little romance, for the Emperor's plans were,
as usual, carried out, and we were married upon the Thursday, as he had
said.  That long and all-powerful arm had plucked her out from the
Kentish town, and had brought her across the Channel, in order to make
sure of my allegiance, and to strengthen the Court by the presence of a
de Choiseul.  As to my cousin Sibylle, it shall be written some day how
she married the gallant Lieutenant Gerard many years afterwards, when he
had become the chief of a brigade, and one of the most noted cavalry
leaders in all the armies of France.  Some day also I may tell how I
came back into my rightful inheritance of Grosbois, which is still
darkened to me by the thought of that terrible uncle of mine, and of
what happened that night when Toussac stood at bay in the library.
But enough of me and of my small fortunes.  You have already heard more
of them, perhaps, than you care for.

As to the Emperor, some faint shadow of whom I have tried in these pages
to raise before you, you have heard from history how, despairing of
gaining command of the Channel, and fearing to attempt an invasion which
might be cut off from behind, he abandoned the camp of Boulogne.
You have heard also how, with this very army which was meant for
England, he struck down Austria and Russia in one year, and Prussia in
the next.  From the day that I entered his service until that on which
he sailed forth over the Atlantic, never to return, I have faithfully
shared his fortunes, rising with his star and sinking with it also.
And yet, as I look back at my old master, I find it very difficult to
say if he was a very good man or a very bad one.  I only know that he
was a very great one, and that the things in which he dealt were also so
great that it is impossible to judge him by any ordinary standard.
Let him rest silently, then, in his great red tomb at the Invalides, for
the workman's work is done, and the mighty hand which moulded France and
traced the lines of modern Europe has crumbled into dust.  The Fates
have used him, and the Fates have thrown him away, but still it lives,
the memory of the little man in the grey coat, and still it moves the
thoughts and actions of men.  Some have written to praise and some to
blame, but for my own part I have tried to do neither one nor the other,
but only to tell the impression which he made upon me in those far-off
days when the Army of England lay at Boulogne, and I came back once more
to my Castle of Grosbois.


